


    
        
            
                Imaging and amanuenses: understanding the Manuscript of
                    De Doctrina Christiana, attributed to John Milton
                
                    
                        Thomas
                        Corns
                        
                            University of Wales, Bangor
                                els009@bangor.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Gordon
                        Campbell
                        
                            Leicester University
                            leb@le.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        John
                        Hale
                        
                            University of Otago
                            patch@earthlight.co.nz
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Fiona
                        Tweedie
                        
                            University of Edinburgh
                            fiona@maths.ed.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    The Research Context of the Problems
                    In 1823, in the Public Record Office in London, a Latin document was
                        discovered and catalogued as SP 9/61. It was identified as De Doctrina Christiana, Milton’s lost theological treatise
                        mentioned by some of his early biographers. The evident heterodoxy of its
                        arguments challenged Milton’s current status as the iconic poet of English
                        Protestantism, and ever since the document has posed interpretative
                        possibilities and problems for critics of Milton’s poetry, and especially of
                            Paradise Lost. While some critics have treated
                        the manuscript as a gloss on his other works, others have been perplexed by
                        the apparent discrepancies between the treatise and his undisputed canonical
                        works. Those discrepancies have usually been accounted for in terms of genre
                        differences, but since 1991 a body of opinion within the Miltonist scholarly
                        community has argued instead that SP 9/61 is not of a Miltonic provenance.
                        In the mid-1990s an interdisciplinary group (all the current group plus
                        David Holmes, who was then supervising Fiona Tweedie’s doctoral work)
                        attempted to extract the key questions to resolve the problem. After several
                        interim reports at conferences, the group issued its final report as a paper
                        to the British Milton Seminar, as a web-document (still available as ), and as
                        a major article (The Provenance of De
                                Doctrina Christiana, Milton
                            Quarterly 31.3 (1997): 67-117).
                    The report unequivocally tied the document to a Miltonic provenance, while
                        indicating its unfinished status and its stylometric inconsistency. It
                        argued that the work was primarily produced in the 1650s; that Milton in
                        part was incorporating and revising material from other Protestant exegetes;
                        and that the manuscript has two principal strata, an ur-text and a
                        transformation of that text effected by a process of revision which
                        primarily consisted of the accretion of material by Milton.
                    As a quick resolution of the status and pertinence of the manuscript in the
                        interpretation of Milton’s later poems, the group had found some answers:
                        indeed, the manuscript has been worked on by Milton, but that work was
                        suspended and incomplete and probably belonged to a period significantly
                        earlier than the publication of Paradise Lost.
                        However, we did not contextualise it closely in the Protestant exegetical
                        tradition; we did not disclose the lower layers of the postulated
                        palimpsest; we did not systematically engage with its Latinity, and -- most
                        significantly for this paper -- we did not address the important issue of
                        its multiple scribal hands.
                    The group has been awarded a major grant (£74k) by the Arts and Humanities
                        Research Board to return to these concerns and to widen the investigation to
                        a larger consideration of the place of the document in radical theology of
                        the early-modern period (MRG-AN1763/APN11001). The debate about SP 9/61 is
                        probably the hottest current controversy in Milton studies, and on its
                        outcome depend not only the determination of the Milton canon but also the
                        validity of interpretative strategies that have been and continue to be used
                        in approaches to his major poetry.
                
                
                    Computer-Assisted Research from Multiple Perspectives
                    Much of the award has been committed to the preparation of electronic texts.
                        We had already an electronic version of the current transcription of the
                        manuscript. To this we are adding electronic versions of the major
                        early-modern Protestant exegetical tracts. (All are in Latin.) These will
                        allow a much more fine-grained reexamination of the stylometry, using much
                        larger samples of situationally analogous controls; they will allow a
                        careful searching for borrowing and analogues in Milton’s text; and they
                        will support the ready comparison of Milton’s use of biblical citations with
                        the practice of significant precursors.
                    The complex relationship between the many variables relating to the diverse
                        physical appearance of the individual pages of the manuscript -- line
                        density, scribes, corrections, page size, watermarks, etc. -- is being
                        investigated using SPSS Data analysis software.
                    Very helpfully, the Public Record Office reprographic department prepared for
                        us a high-resolution imaged version of the document. Most straightforwardly,
                        it allows a research group spread from Edinburgh and Bangor to Dunedin to
                        work on a document lodged in a remote suburb of west London, with for most
                        purposes as much facility as if the document were immediately present. But
                        it also allows the highly vexed question of Milton’s use of amanuenses to be
                        engaged with a new and innovative precision.
                
                
                    Blind Milton and his Scribes
                    Milton was totally blind by about 1651, and for subsequent work he relied
                        wholly on the assistance of amanuenses. SP 9/61, the most considerable
                        extant manuscript of Miltonic provenance, consists primarily of a
                        transcription by the scribe Jeremy Picard of an early draft that is no
                        longer extant. The opening section of that document was copied again by
                        Daniel Skinner, who prepared the manuscript for the press after Milton’s
                        death. The Picard section is evidently a working manuscript, in that
                        sections have been recopied and substituted by Picard, and there are
                        numerous marginal and interlinear additions. These for the most part are in
                        Picard’s hand, though the most thorough account to date has identified
                        another seven amanuenses responsible for multiple changes, and several other
                        hands -- perhaps as many as eleven further scribes.
                    Here our project has several aspects. First, we want to identify how many
                        scribes were actually involved. Second, we want to determine the order of
                        their contribution to the developing document. Finally, we want to associate
                        the hands we have distinguished with hands found in other Miltonic documents
                        and elsewhere, and we should like to identify the scribes wherever possible.
                    The imaged version of the text is immensely useful. Earlier researchers have
                        worked -- necessarily in a somewhat inhibited manner, given its uniqueness
                        and its fragility -- on the document itself or on photographic reproductions
                        of the document. Using advanced image-editing software (Adobe Photoshop) we
                        can freely cut and paste letter forms and word forms closely to compare
                        diverse examples and to form a composite repertoire of each hand. We can
                        with facility juxtapose examples from SP 9/61 with imaged versions of other
                        pertinent manuscripts. Using the electronic transcription of the document,
                        we can identify throughout the manuscript other occurrences of the word and
                        letter forms found in the scribal additions and form judgments about their
                        similarities and differences.
                    This paper will present a number of investigations that are components in
                        this whole process, from a comparison of a single marginal addition with
                        another late manuscript of Miltonic provenance to more complex accounts of
                        the variety of forms to be found within the practice of Picard and the
                        implications of that for understanding the development of the manuscript
                        into its present form.
                
            
        
    
