


    
        
            
                The electronic publication of archaeological field
                    reports using XML
                
                    
                        Christiane
                        Meckseper
                        
                            Humanities Research Institute,
                            University of Sheffield
                            ch.meckseper@sheffield.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Claire
                        Warwick
                        Department of Information Studies
                            University of Sheffield
                            c.warwick@sheffield.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Overview:
                    This paper will look at the use and potential of electronic publication and
                        the usability of the markup language XML for the publication of field
                        reports by commercial archaeological units. The field reports fall into the
                        field of grey literature as they are produced as client reports by
                        archaeological units as part of the planning process and do not receive
                        official publication or widespread dissemination. It has been recognised,
                        however, that the reports contain valuable information that would be useful
                        for research purposes as well as for other commercial units and the public
                        and that suitable means should be found in order to disseminate that
                        information.
                    The basis for the project is a case study undertaken by the author, who was
                        part of the Department of Information Studies at the University of
                        Sheffield, in conjunction with a small commercial unit, Archaeological
                        Research and Consultancy at the University of Sheffield (ARCUS). Current
                        publication practices within academic and commercial archaeology were
                        reviewed and the ARCUS field reports were used in order to test the
                        usability of XML for the markup and electronic publication of those
                        reports.
                
                
                    Background:
                    The dissemination of archaeological information and data is still mainly
                        undertaken in the format of the traditional paper-based excavation report.
                        However, archaeological data is now increasingly being collected and stored
                        in a digital format and the advent of the Internet has also raised the
                        issues of electronic publication and dissemination of data and site reports
                        via this medium. Electronic publication is taking place, but it is still few
                        and far between and mainly restricted to academic research projects.
                    In Britain, archaeological practice outside the university research
                        environment is restricted to interventions undertaken as part of the
                        planning process and is funded entirely by the “polluter pays” principle.
                        This has emphasised a dilemma archaeological practice was increasingly faced
                        with. On the one hand, it has become just a small part of the planning
                        process and is governed by the same commercial principles as any other
                        development contractor. On the other, the results it produces are still seen
                        as “academic” and a basis for research. There is an innate duty or ethic
                        within archaeology to disseminate results and to produce syntheses of
                        material. However, the funds provided usually do not allow more than the
                        implementation of an immediate mitigation strategy for development and the
                        production of a minimal “developer’s report”.
                    A recent survey of user needs concerning publication and dissemination of
                        data within archaeology (“PUNS survey”, Jones et al 2001) undertaken by the
                        Council of British Archaeology (CBA) identified that even though fieldwork
                        reports are one of the most frequently consulted types of archaeological
                        literature, grey reports have a limited audience beyond the commercial
                        domain due to the difficulty in access and lack of awareness of that
                        literature. It also stressed that many archaeologists are dissatisfied with
                        this situation as they feel that information of relevance to their work is
                        being produced of which they are unaware.
                
                
                    Proposed paper:
                    This paper addresses some of the problems of dissemination raised by the PUNS
                        survey and also other issues inherent in the publication an dissemination of
                        archaeological data like the provision of adequate metadata and the
                        searchability of archaeological information on-line. It describes the use of
                        XML and a modified version of the TEI lite DTD of the Oxford Text Encoding
                        Initiative for the mark up of a sample of ARCUS excavation reports. It also
                        looks at the possibility of incorporating controlled archaeological
                        vocabulary into the DTD. It raises questions about current practices of
                        electronic publication within archaeology and the availability and
                        searchability of data provided by the discipline for research purposes.
                
                
                    Results:
                    It was found that the electronic publication of grey reports would be very
                        useful for as it would allow a quicker response time and a rapid
                        dissemination of information within the fast moving and changing environment
                        of commercial archaeology. XML would be a useful and economic tool for the
                        publication of field reports as it would allow users to selectively download
                        separate sections of field reports which are of particular importance to
                        them. Archaeology-specific elements would also allow a better context
                        specific searchability of reports on the web. However, it is acknowledged
                        that XML is still a technology in its infancy and also that it is beyond the
                        financial capabilities of many small commercial units to implement a system
                        of electronic publication. An important point that needs to be raised is
                        that national archaeological institutions will have to accept electronic
                        versions of field reports in order for them to be formally recognised and be
                        able to be built into the financial framework of a commercial project
                        design.
                
                
                    Relevance to ALLC-ACH themes:
                    The paper is of particular relevance to the themes of the ALLC-ACH conference
                        as it addresses the issues of the development of new methodologies in one
                        discipline that will have a considerable impact on others. The electronic
                        publication of commercial field reports will provide indispensable
                        information not only for other commercial units but also for academic
                        research, thus helping to bring together two increasingly diverging fields.
                        Archaeological data is also used by other disciplines within the Humanities
                        and Sciences, like anthropology, sociology, earth sciences and others.
                        Archaeological site reports also consist not only of text but of a wide
                        variety of images and the electronic medium could provide increasing
                        resources such as 3D reconstruction or even audio and video data. The
                        quicker response time of the electronic medium and the increasing
                        availability of primary archaeological data should also allow users to
                        examine the assumptions upon which previous interpretations are presented
                        and to facilitate the development of their own models, thus fundamentally
                        changing the nature of discourse within archaeology and the humanities in
                        general.
                
            
        
        
            
                Reference
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Jones
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    MacSween
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Jeffrey
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Morris
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Heyworth
                                
                            
                            From the Ground Up. The Publication of Archaeological
                                Projects: a user needs survey
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                        [Online]. Available at:  [Accessed:
                            31.8.2001].
                    
                
            
        
    
