


    
        
            
                Building a multimedia haiku dictionary
                
                    
                        Christine
                        Ruotolo
                        
                            Electronic Text Center
                            University of Virginia Library
                            cjr2q@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Over the past year, the University of Virginia Library's Japanese Text Initiative
                    (JTI), in partnership with the Electronic Text Center (Etext), has been
                    developing an online multimedia dictionary of haiku. In this paper, I will
                    describe the scope and content of the project, and how it combines text and
                    multimedia materials in unique ways. I will also discuss the project from a
                    technical perspective, describing its encoding, interface, and search and
                    delivery mechanisms, with an emphasis on new problems encountered in the course
                    of development.
                Haiku is a well-known and increasingly ubiquitous poetic form in the West and
                    around the world. But while many non-Japanese are familiar with the metrical
                    structure of haiku poetry, few have a sophisticated knowledge of its traditional
                    themes, which are based upon deeply nuanced kidai and kigo (season-words). At
                    the heart of the JTI project is an English translation of portions of the Nyumon
                    Saijiki, a standard reference of kidai and kigo produced by the Museum of Haiku
                    Literature in Tokyo. The Nyumon Saijiki contains entries for the people, places,
                    and things found in haiku, with examples of modern and classical haiku under
                    each entry. Our translation of this work, completed by world-renowned haiku
                    expert William Higginson, consists of kanji, hiragana, romaji, and English
                    renderings for each of the 3,000 kidai and kigo, along with a definition and
                    brief explication. For the 100 most important terms, Mr. Higginson has
                    translated the full entry, which includes a discussion of proper usage and
                    several example poems. In addition, we have supplemented these full entries with
                    image and sound files harvested from online archives. Audio and visual
                    illustrations of these recurrent themes (the cries of autumnal insects, the hazy
                    moon of a spring night, and so forth) will greatly enhance the user's
                    understanding of poetry that is so deeply rooted in sensory perceptions of
                    nature; this is doubly true for Western audiences who live half a world away
                    from the particular plants, animals, rituals, and seasonal phenomena discussed
                    in the poems.
                Although Etext has produced and maintained full-text SGML/XML collections for
                    over a decade, and the JTI's work with Japanese language materials dates back to
                    1997, the current project has presented us with many new challenges. In the
                    past, the use of images in our collections was limited primarily to page images
                    and book illustrations; sound files were all but non-existent. The project's web
                    designer has strived to integrate the multimedia components into the project in
                    a way that supplements but does not overwhelm the textual content. The potential
                    audience for this project is incredibly broad; we anticipate that it will be
                    used around the world by everyone from grade-school students to professional
                    scholars of Japanese literature. Different users will require different views of
                    the data and different tools for manipulating it. A K-12 audience might want to
                    see just the English translations of the poems, accompanied by the relevant
                    images, while someone learning the Japanese language would be better served by a
                    poem in its kanji and romanized versions, along with an audio recitation and
                    highlighted links from the keywords in the poem to their full dictionary
                    entries. More expert users might want to run sophisticated search queries on the
                    dictionary, and a student of comparative literature might want to cross-query
                    the dictionary against the English Poetry Database or a similar collection.
                In order to present these multiple views of the project, we have encoded the data
                    in XML-compliant TEI and have generated much of the output with XSL stylesheets.
                    This represents a major transition for the Etext Center, which since 1992 has
                    stored data in SGML and converted it "on the fly" to HTML with CGI scripts. The
                    nature of the saijiki data, with its deeply nested hierarchies and the
                    database-like entry structure, combined with our need to sort, recombine and
                    re-present this data very nimbly, led us to an XML/XSL workflow. However, we
                    made some sacrifices with this approach. Our on-the-fly delivery of the data
                    through XSL stylesheets has been considerably slower than a comparable CGI
                    transformation. For this reason, we currently deliver large chunks of data
                    through CGI or as XSL-generated static HTML pages while we work to reduce the
                    delivery time.
                A further complication has arisen from our need to use UTF-8 encoding for this
                    project, instead of the EUC encoding we have used in the rest of the JTI
                    collection. Unicode allows us to easily represent kana and hiragana alongside
                    Western characters, including macron vowels that aren't part of the EUC
                    character set. However, our OpenText search tool does not support Unicode; until
                    current work on Unicode compatibility for OpenText is completed, we need to
                    convert the Unicode to EUC prior to indexing and essentially maintain two
                    parallel versions of the same data.
                In the coming year, we look forward to translating the remaining portions of the
                    Nyumon Saijiki, adding to the supplementary multimedia materials, and
                    integrating this haiku collection both "vertically" (with our other
                    Japanese-language materials) and "horizontally" (with other poetry collections
                    and dictionary projects across our holdings).
            
        
    
