


    
        
            
                The Myth of Roland and Its Function as Cultural
                    Hypertext as Expressed in 'RolandHT'
                
                    
                        Vika
                        Zafrin
                        
                            Brown University
                            vika@wordsend.org
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Overview
                    This paper will present an innovative treatment of the literary phenomenon of
                        Roland, alleged historical personnage and an epic hero almost unique in his
                        breadth of influence from the eighth century to today. The treatment, which
                        attempts more successfully than a printed book to present all the
                        contributor works as equal, is made possible for the first time by the
                        electronic medium. The combining of works with such different cultural
                        contexts is reconciled by highlighting similarities and explicitly
                        juxtaposing the differences between them, and by thematically connecting the
                        works using both hyperlinks and critical discussion. At the same time, the
                        reader is given a chance to create his own mental picture of the composite
                        Roland character by following carefully explicated links. I will argue that
                        the hypertextual experience of Roland is closer to the way in which the
                        character was experienced originally--both by storytellers and by
                        audiences--an experience that reading a paperbound book cannot replicate.
                        Among the issues discussed will be the relationship between oral tradition
                        and hypertext, the issue of character identity across cultural boundaries,
                        and the role of the reader/audience in the epic experience.
                
                
                    Abstract
                    Vanhoutte 2000 speaks of "the advent of the electronic paradigm to the field
                        of scholarly editing and textual criticism," which facilitates the creation
                        of "new kinds of editions in which the record of textual variation becomes a
                        central point of attention, both on the markup- and on the delivery- side."
                            RolandHT is a work which, while it is not a
                        critical edition of any one text, certainly speaks to text variation as its
                        main focus.
                    RolandHT began as a critical exposition and literary
                        experiment. At its center is the protagonist of the 11th-century Song of Roland and of many other works in Europe's
                        literary canons. Currently in its second year of development at Brown
                        University, RolandHT uses hypertext theory and Jean
                        Baudrillard's idea of fragmentary writing to weave Roland storylines from
                        different literary traditions into a single multi-pathed narrative. A new,
                        composite, often self-contradictory virtual character is thus created,
                        drawing upon such contributor works as the French Song of
                            Roland, the Italian Orlando Furioso,
                        the Welsh Can Rolant and many others.
                    In RolandHT, passages from a set of primary sources
                        are combined into a heavily interlinked web. The hyperlinks, which lead
                        directly from one quoted passage to another in the same work or in a
                        different one, highlight both similarities and differences among the themes
                        and imagery in the storylines. This is true both for works whose plots
                        parallel (for example, in the German, Welsh and Norse retellings of the
                        French Song of Roland) and for writings with
                        differing plots (such as a rendition of the Song of
                            Roland on one hand and the Italian Renaissance epic Roland in Love on the other). Some of these hyperlinks
                        point to the next passage in the work through an intermediary paragraph
                        which explicates the connection between the two passages.
                    The project's aim is not a coherent linear narrative. It is, rather, an
                        exploration of this character, so pervasive in Europe's writing between the
                        Middle Ages and the present day, that reaches beyond the confines of any one
                        work written about him. Roland evolved as an oral epic hero for three
                        hundred years before the first extant written work about him was created.
                        The electronic environment is an invaluable and unique tool for exploring
                        the relationship between orality and literacy in the context of the
                        evolution of this character. Before we had the technology we have now, this
                        sort of study was performed in a one-sided fashion, by studying and trying
                        to understand orality in its own context, as Walter Ong has done, and
                        viewing literacy separately. Now an attempt can be made to reproduce the fragmentary nature of oral
                        storytelling in a written context, and let the readers experience it in a
                        fashion which will enable them to better understand how people learned about
                        Roland in the first place, during his proliferation in the age of primarily
                        oral storytelling.
                    The project cannot possibly reproduce fully the literary aspects of Ong's
                        primary oral culture. The Carolingians (inhabitants of France and Germany in
                        the eighth and ninth centuries, when the Roland legend was conceived) were
                        not a primary oral culture (McKitterick). Their storytelling tradition,
                        however, was oral, as was the Roland legend, which first appears in writing
                        only in the eleventh century. Instead, the new approach to reading epic
                        poetry that RolandHT presents is arguably closer to
                        the way in which epic poetry was perceived by
                        its audience when it was presented orally--no story was seen as an isolated
                        phenomenon, but rather as part of a cultural network. In the process of
                        reading a work of print literature, even a well-annotated one, it is easy to
                        forget the impossibility of its existence outside of its cultural context.
                        This fact, while certainly true when cultural boundaries are being crossed,
                        becomes even more relevant when there is a large difference between the
                        reader's temporal context and the time period in which the work was written.
                        In this case, especially if the work's original language is the same as that
                        of the reader, one can be mislead into a false sense of understanding of the
                        work, and fail to delve into it more deeply. This new electronic version of
                        the Roland texts simply does not allow one to think of a work of literature
                        as an isolated event. In the traditional study of literature one is
                        compelled to study one text at a time in depth, subsequently branching out.
                        Here we have the opportunity instead to piece knowledge together from many
                        starting points and eventually to converge toward an understanding, instead
                        of branching away from generalized, theoretical knowledge to specific
                        points.
                    The knowledge to be gained from this ongoing investigation will fill a void
                        in Roland scholarship. This work provides its readers with a tool to help
                        them visualize the complexity of the Roland canon by presenting it as a
                        whole. At the same time, it makes it possible to trace themes and imagery
                        common to some or all of the works, presenting them together, interwoven as
                        they are in the source materials but clarified by critical commentary
                        interspersed with fragments of primary texts illustrating the points. These
                        analyses could be presented on paper, each of them separately; however, this
                        would make visualizing the whole much more difficult, and be discordant with
                        Roland's multi-faceted nature.
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Rosamond
                                    McKitterick
                                
                            
                            The Carolingians and the Written Word
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1989
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Walter
                                    Ong
                                
                            
                            Orality and Literacy
                            
                                New York
                                Routledge
                                1982
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Edward
                                    Vanhoutte
                                
                            
                            Textual Variation, Electronic Editions and
                                Hypertext
                        
                        
                            Paper presented at ACH/ALLC 2000, Glasgow
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
