


    
        
            
                Facet analytical theory as a basis for a subject
                    organization tool in a humanities portal
                
                    
                        Vanda
                        Broughton
                        
                            University College London
                            v.broughton@ucl.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Michael
                        Fraser
                        
                            Humbul Humanities Hub
                            mike.fraser@computing-services.oxford.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Sheila
                        Anderson
                        
                            Arts and Humanities Data Service
                            sheila.anderson@ahds.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The paper describes a collaborative project, funded by the UK Arts and Humanities
                    Research Board, between the School of Library, Archive &amp; Information
                    Studies, University College London and two major digital resource gateways, Arts
                    &amp; Humanities Data Service, and the Humbul Humanities Hub.
                AHDS () and Humbul () are on-going government funded projects
                    for the identification, evaluation and organization of quality digital resources
                    in the humanities, primarily for the use of the higher education community.
                    AHDS' remit includes visual and performing arts and archaeology in addition to
                    traditional humanities disciplines; Humbul covers a slightly narrower humanities
                    field including history, archaeology, literature, theology and philosophy.
                The two are developing a single humanities portal () which will become operational in 2002.
                    The new portal will draw in resources from the wider Web in addition to the
                    managed material already available.
                An important consideration is the choice of a tool to manage the subject content
                    of the new site. A digital library on the AHDS model has much in common with the
                    conventional library in terms of structuring the semantic content of the
                    resource; it may benefit from the knowledge organization theory that has been
                    developed over the last fifty years within the library sector for the creation
                    of tools for vocabulary management and semantic organization of document
                    content. Systems such as faceted classifications, structured subject headings,
                    thesauri, and other controlled vocabularies provide a scientifically based
                    approach to the analysis of 'document' content, and to the creation of indexes,
                    descriptors, visible taxonomies and hierarchies, as well as linear ordering
                    schemes (i.e. rules for filing order and sequencing) for the physical management
                    of materials with respect to intellectual content. These have been tested over
                    managed bibliographic databases as well as print-based materials, and the theory
                    is at a high level of sophistication.
                Existing means of subject organization at AHDS and Humbul are the Library of
                    Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) and the Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC),
                    both designed for organization of print-based material in a traditional library.
                    While these offer management advantages (e.g. an established system with
                    institutional support, regular maintenance and revision, and centralised
                    bibliographic services) they are not particularly useful within a digital
                    environment. They display little sophistication in the structure, cannot handle
                    complex objects well, and can do little to expose the complex interrelationships
                    and multidimensional links within the structure of the digital collection.
                The new humanities portal requires a system that performs several functions;
                        accurate description, for retrieval purposes, of complex digital
                            documents/objects with a range of attributes, both of intellectual
                            content and format
                        provision of a systematic structure for the organization of the
                            front-end in a directory format, using hypertext techniques to expose
                            deeper layers of the network
                        generation of structured subject headings for specific objects
                        manipulation of these to create browsable alphabetical subject indexes
                        capability of conversion to a thesaural structure to provide a
                            controlled vocabulary of keywords and concepts.
                    
                Ideally, the system should also display;
                        potential for multiple access points to the structure to enable
                            resource discovery by various routes or search strategies;
                        potential for incorporation into search software as a device in
                            negotiating the wider Web.
                    
                The School of Library, Archive &amp; Information Studies (SLAIS) at
                    University College London has a particularly strong history in education and
                    research in classification and indexing. It is one of only a few British schools
                    offering teaching in this area, and its staff are actively involved in the
                    management of several systems of bibliographic classification, and research into
                    the development and use of faceted schemes. We are investigating a structure of
                    this kind for the organization of the new humanities portal.
                Classifications built on the facet analytical model provide effective tools for
                    analysing and organizing documents on the basis of their subject content, and
                    consequently for retrieving those documents from a managed store. They work on
                    different principles from older enumerative schemes such as Dewey and the
                    Library of Congress classifications which simply provide long lists, or
                    enumerations, of classes for the accommodation of documents.
                Facet analysis was conceived by S. R. Ranganathan, a mathematician by training,
                    and a student at SLAIS in the 1920s. He proposed a system for the description
                    and organization of documents with complex subject content, based on
                    identification and analysis of constituent parts of the subject, rather than by
                    creation of lists or enumerations of compound classes into which specific
                    documents must be fitted. Documents were analysed, the content encoded, and the
                    codes synthesised into an appropriate classmark which was used for filing and
                    which was expressive of the subject content.
                Ranganathan's system was ground-breaking, but relatively unsophisticated. It
                    continues to be developed in India, but is virtually unused outside that
                    country. In the UK the Classification Research Group, formed in the 1950s,
                    further developed facet analytical theory.
                The internal logic of a faceted system of the CRG type is based on rigorous
                    analysis of the terminology of a subject, whereby terms are sorted into standard
                    sets of functional categories. Within these categories a range of semantic
                    relations are acknowledged, and problems of vocabulary control (such as
                    synonymy, partial synonymy and variations in word forms) are addressed. A
                    sophisticated system syntax provides for arrangement and combination of terms
                    both intra- and inter-category, and for the management of syntactic relations.
                    This improves performance in the accommodation of complex subjects, the
                    predictability of location, and in the effectiveness of retrieval.
                A faceted classification is, in its simplest form, a structured set of simple
                    terms or concepts with rules for the combination of these into compound concepts
                    such as occur in the content of documents. These compounds are placed precisely
                    in the base structure by the application of the system syntax. When these
                    classes are populated by the 'real' subjects of documents (or other objects with
                    semantic content) a more complex structure grows in accordance with the internal
                    logic of the system.
                A faceted classification, when applied to a large collection of documents, can
                    generate a very complex knowledge structure of n-dimensionality and great
                    logical regularity, with deep levels of hierarchy. The resultant structure can
                    be utilised in a number of ways; as an ordering device, as a source of index
                    terms and subject headings, and can also be converted to a thesaurus. Hypertext
                    can be utilised to expand the levels of hierarchy, or to make links between
                    distributed elements.
                An example of a small classification for religion demonstrates how the structure
                    can be applied:
                    Judaism
                        (Form subdivisions)
                        Bibliography of Judaism
                        Encyclopaedia of Judaism
                        (Place subdivisions)
                        Judaism in Europe
                        (Period subdivisions)
                        Judaism in the Middle Ages
                        Judaism in the Nineteenth Century
                        Judaism in Nineteenth century Europe
                        (Philosophy and theory of religion)
                        Religious philosophy of Judaism
                        (Sacred texts)
                        Hebrew Bible
                        Mediaeval Hebrew Bible
                        (Worship)
                        Jewish festivals
                        (Organization of the religion)
                        Jewish religious law
                        (Sacred texts)
                        The Hebrew Bible in Jewish religious law
                
                This can be represented in the form of subject headings as:
                    Judaism
                        Judaism - Bibliography
                        Judaism - Encyclopaedias
                        Judaism - Europe
                        Judaism - Middle ages
                        Judaism - Nineteenth century
                        Judaism - Nineteenth century - Europe
                        Judaism - Religious philosophy
                        Judaism - Bible
                        Judaism - Bible - Middle Ages
                        Judaism - Festivals
                        Judaism - Religious law
                        Judaism - Religious law - Bible
                
                These can be left in this order, to represent the systematic structure, or they
                    can be alphabetized:
                    Judaism
                        Judaism - Bible
                        Judaism - Bible - Middle Ages
                        Judaism - Bibliography
                        Judaism - Encyclopaedias
                        Judaism - Europe
                        Judaism - Festivals
                        Judaism - Middle ages
                        Judaism - Nineteenth century
                        Judaism - Nineteenth century - Europe
                        Judaism - Religious law
                        Judaism - Religious law - Bible
                        Judaism - Religious philosophy
                
                From a small base vocabulary of 30-40 terms like this one, hundreds of multi-term
                    subject headings can be generated.
                The subject headings can be inverted to form a browsable index in which
                    distributed relatives are collocated.
                
                    Bible - Judaism
                        Bible - Religious law - Judaism
                        Bibliographies - Judaism
                        Encyclopaedias - Judaism
                        Europe - Judaism
                        Europe - Nineteenth century - Judaism
                        Festivals - Judaism
                        Judaism
                        Middle Ages - Bible - Judaism
                        Middle Ages - Judaism
                        Nineteenth century - Judaism
                        Religious law - Judaism
                        Religious philosophy - Judaism
                
                The regularity of the system and its rules of syntax suggests that much of the
                    routine work of managing documents could be carried out automatically, once the
                    initial intellectual analysis has been made.
                In a testbed implementation for the research, AHDS and Humbul are applying the
                    knowledge structure to the Portal's planned metadata repository for all the
                    digital objects in their collection; it is likely that XML will prove to be the
                    best tool for the implementation of the structure. They will also experiment
                    with its use in cross-disciplinary browsing and retrieval of digital resources
                    which are held elsewhere.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    V.
                                    Broughton
                                
                            
                            Faceted classification as a basis for knowledge
                                organization in a digital environment
                        
                        
                            New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    V.
                                    Broughton
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Heather
                                    Lane
                                
                            
                            Classification schemes revisited; applications to web
                                indexing and searching
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Alan
                                    Thomas
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jame
                                    Shearer
                                
                            
                            Internet searching and indexing; the subject approach
                            
                                New York
                                Howarth
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    R.
                                    Ranganathan
                                
                            
                            Prolegomena to library classification
                            
                                
                                Madras Library Association
                                1937
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Mills
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Vanda
                                    Broughton
                                
                            
                            Bliss Bibliographic Classfication
                            
                                London
                                Butterworth, Bowker-Saur
                                1977
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
