


    
        
            
                Classrooms, computer labs, and remote locations:
                    Integrating the three spaces of computer aided interactive writing courses
                
                    
                        Charles
                        Donelan
                        
                            University of California, Santa Barbara
                            cdonelan@writing.ucsb.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Students in computer aided interactive writing courses can benefit from a
                    teaching approach that integrates the three spaces in which they encounter
                    materials and assignments. Where the paper and chalk classroom separates
                    in-class writing from homework, the networked course blurs the distinction
                    between in-class, in-lab and remote writing.
                Responding to the changes brought about by CAIW will require the redefinition of
                    the spaces in which writing takes place. The networked computer lab is a
                    synchronous space in which students may give and receive feedback in real time,
                    but web-based interactive writing programs make remote participation in online
                    discussions and feedback cycles possible. The remote location is ordinarily the
                    site of asynchronous learning. How does bringing remote students into
                    synchronous activities change what can be done in the CAIW course? What can
                    happen in the synchronous space of the lab when it is opened to access from
                    remote locations?
                CAIW also affects the traditional classroom. For courses that meet in both
                    traditional classrooms and computer labs, the new CAIW activities, which raise
                    levels of synchronous peer-to-peer and asynchronous remote learning so sharply,
                    are bound to affect the way students learn in the classroom. I will examine some
                    classroom effects of CAIW activities, and then present strategies for using the
                    traditional classroom to frame and reinforce the learning going on in the
                    computer lab and from remote locations.
                Computer assisted interactive writing requires course designs that take full
                    advantage of its capabilities. Recent work at UC Santa Barbara has explored the
                    use of synchronous feedback exchange, web research, remote messaging, and
                    electronic group work in CAIW classes with positive results. Generally,
                    successful CAIW courses employ three strategies:
                        sequential, process-oriented assignments,
                        integration of synchronous and asynchronous communication, and 
                        carefully directed group interaction.
                    
                Sequential assignments, used in many traditional classes, become even more
                    important in CAIW settings due to the temporality of on-line writing. The
                    ability to change on-line writing allows students more opportunities for
                    feedback, as well as for revisions of preliminary materials, but can also
                    undermine the decision-making process essential to developing a finished work.
                    However, a dynamic exchange of peer- and teacher review in a CAIW class can
                    allow students to improve their understanding of process considerably. When a
                    sequence of electronic pre-writing assignments replaces the traditional
                    deadline-and-return schedule, students recognize the essential elements of
                    process rather than the external necessities of a course syllabus.
                Likewise, the full integration of synchronous and asynchronous exchange affords
                    greater flexibility for in-class assignments. Synchronous exchange enables a
                    more efficient distribution of student writing in peer groups and faster
                    communication than most traditional methods. Complementary synchronous
                    assignments allow individual students time to create thoughtful work and
                    assimilate feedback into revisions. Successful assignments in a CAIW environment
                    therefore generally follow an alternating pattern of synchronous and
                    asynchronous responses to develop an effective discourse community.
                Similarly, assignment sequences require a controlled pattern of individual,
                    partner, and group work, with specific schedules and goals. In particular,
                    collaborative work enhances students understanding of realistic writing
                    situations, when instructors monitor, direct, and critique individual
                    contributions to the tasks of management and production. Employing all three
                    course design strategies successfully has created dynamic, interesting
                    communities of writers.
            
        
    
