


    
        
            
                 Encoding of glyph variants -- some preliminary
                    experiments
                
                    
                        Christian
                        Wittern
                        
                            Kyoto University, Institute for Research in
                            Humanities wittern@kanji.zinbun.kyoto-u.ac.jp
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    1. Introduction
                    The character-glyph model, which essentially describes a class-instance
                        relationship between a character and the class of glyphs that can be used to
                        render it, has been the underlying model that made modern character encoding
                        standards possible.
                    While this model has been successfully applied to many scripts, its
                        application to East Asian logographic writing systems has not been
                        satisfying. One of the reasons for this fact is that the model implicitly
                        neglects the importance of differences on the glyph level and does not allow
                        for the encoding of such differences. In East Asia, however, there are a
                        variety of orthographic conventions in place, that do require that specific
                        glyphs can be selected. Since the model did not allow for this, in many
                        cases such glyphs have been encoded as separate characters that would have
                        to be considered merely glyph variants according to the character-glyph
                        model. This fact has largely contributed to the bloat of East Asian
                        character encodings and has severely hampered information processing in this
                        cultural sphere.
                    In this paper, I am presenting research that is designed to solve this
                        problem. It does this by storing information about the relationship of glyph
                        variants, characters and a considerable number of other attributes in a
                        separate database in form of a topic map. Encoded documents are normalized
                        to use only codepoint to represent one character. Information about the
                        intended glyph is separated out and represented with markup constructs. Upon
                        rendering of the document, this can be used to draw the glyphs that where
                        present in the original document. Additionally, this approach allows also
                        alternative renderings according to various requirements. Since information
                        about the usage of these glyphs is stored in the topic map, it can be used
                        to render with the respective glyphs expected by audiences in modern Japan,
                        Taiwan or mainland China, where the typographic and orthographic conventions
                        have widely diverged in the last decades.
                    As a proof of concept, a fragment of a topic map for East Asian logographs
                        has been implemented and used with a small sample of texts to produce output
                        in the described manner. Some details of this process are given below.
                
                
                    2. Some considerations
                    In a series of experiments, some different rendering processes have been
                        tried. They vary in how the information needed for rendering is deduced and
                        how explicit the markup for this has to be. The two most extreme cases
                            are:
                            No explicit information about glyphs that may have variant
                                rendering forms is stored in the texts. All information has to be
                                deduced from contextual information (e.g. the date and place of the
                                origin of a text and the information associated with this in the
                                database) or explicit information about these occurrences in the
                                database.
                            All information for rendering the glyphs is stored in the texts.
                                In this case, no external database is needed.
                        
                    The main purpose of the experiments has been to determine a good compromise
                        between these two extremes. What can be considered a good compromise itself,
                        however depends on a range of different factors and will only be possibly
                        established independently for every project, no global recommendations are
                        possible. Any encoding scheme, that attempts to deal with these
                        complexities, will have to take this into account and be better adaptable to
                        the needs of its intended users.
                    In this experiment, the texts are encoded according to the TEI Guidelines
                        (P3/P4) and the database of characters and glyphs is encoded in the topic
                        map XML format, a XML implementation of the ISO 13250 Topic Maps. Both of
                        these are widely used standards in their respective areas and provide the
                        flexibility and expressive power that was needed here.
                
                
                    3. A topic map of East Asian logographs
                    The topic map of East Asian logographs contains information in the following
                            dimensions:
                            abstract character
                            character instances
                            mappings to coded character sets
                            structure of glyph
                            glyph variants
                            time scope
                            location scope
                            meanings
                            equivalent characters
                        
                    This list is not exhaustive, since one of the characteristics of the topic
                        map paradigm is that it is always possible to add basic data types, but
                        reflects which particular character properties proved necessary for the
                        problem at hand. This list will have to be modified as other application
                        domains and areas are explored.
                    It should also be noted, that this list is not flat, but the data are
                        organized in super-class/sub-class and class/instance hierarchies. This will
                        be made more explicit in the presentation.
                
                
                    4. The rendering process
                    The rendering process requires a two pass processing.
                    In a first pass, the rendering process will read the text and determine which
                        characters require special treatment. These might be marked as such in the
                        text, or this information might depend on parameters passed to the rendering
                        process.
                    After information about which characters occur in the text is available In a
                        first step, the rendering process has to read the topic map and store the
                        information contained in there in tables that will be accessed in the later
                        stages of the rendering process. What information is extracted from the
                        topic map depends on the desired form of rendering.

                
                
                    5. Conclusions 
                    Since the character encoding lacked the necessary differentiation of
                        characters and glyphs and appropriate mechanisms to access them, an
                        additional layer of information has been created in form of a topic map that
                        mediates between the characters that are encoded in the document and the
                        rendering of these characters with instances of glyphs. This allows for the
                        additional feature of rendering according to various user requirements, that
                        otherwise would involve costly and error prone conversions on the character
                        encoding level. It thus opens a new prospect for the information processing
                        of East Asian texts. It should be noted however, that this process
                        introduces the abstraction from the concrete glyph instance to the
                        underlying character, which is an act of interpretation that might introduce
                        errors.
                    The experiments reported here might also provide valuable input for a
                        revision of the Writing System Declaration (WSD) in TEI, which currently
                        does not support such fine-grained and flexible encoding of glyph
                        differences.
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Association for Computers and the Humanities
                                (ACH)
                            
                            
                                Association for Computational Linguistics
                                (ACL)
                            
                            
                                Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing
                                    (ALLC)
                            
                            Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange
                                (TEI P3)
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Lou
                                    Burnard
                                
                            
                            
                                Chicago, Oxford
                                Text Encoding Initiative
                                May 16, 1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                 International Organization for
                                Standardization
                            
                            ISO/IEC 13250, Information technology - SGML
                                Applications - Topic Maps
                            
                                Geneva
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    John
                                    Lehman
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    C.
                                    Hsieh
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Christian
                                    Wittern
                                
                            
                            A Project for Dealing with the Missing Character
                                Problem
                        
                        
                            Presentation at the Electronic Buddhist Text Initiatvie
                                (EBTI) meeting held May 25 and 26, 2001 at Dongguk University in
                                Seoul
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christian
                                    Wittern
                                
                            
                            Toward a Web-based Scholar's Workbench
                        
                        
                            Presentation at the 'Third Conference On Sinology',
                                held at the Academia Sinica June 29 to July 1, 2000 in Taipei
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christian
                                    Wittern
                                
                            
                            Non-system characters in XML documents
                        
                        
                            Zenkoku buken - jouhousentaa Jinbunshakaigaku
                                gakujitsujouhouseminaa Series [Series of the National seminar of
                                Computer application in the Humanities and Social Sciences ]
                            
                                10
                                
                                35-50
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
