


    
        
            
                Mapping Differences in 1st Century Greek Style
                
                    
                        David
                        L.
                        Mealand
                        
                            University of Edinburgh
                            D.Mealand@ed.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                A series of studies has built up a set of 178 samples of Greek texts in a format
                    which now provides a dataset comprising 178 rows and 35 columns. The previous
                    studies by this author and relevant works by others are listed in Mealand
                    (1999). There are 30 effective linguistic features being tested for each sample,
                    and to these we need to add classification categories such as author, genre,
                    subgroup, text and sample. The 178 samples and 30 linguistic variables alone
                    provide 5340 observations. We are now in a position to make report on detailed
                    stylistic comparisons of a wide range of texts from 300 BCE to 200 CE but
                    focused on texts from 100 BCE to 100 CE. Some manual intervention and a set of
                    programmes eventually turns complexities of the Greek texts from the TLG into
                    thousand row columns of single words, and simpler routines then allow a pentium
                    to make much shorter work of the word counts.
                The texts include a range of Greek historical writers: Polybius, Dionysius of
                    Halicarnassus, Plutarch; also a set of Greek technical writers, some samples of
                    letters and other documents preserved on papyri, and a range of biblical and
                    other Jewish and Christian writings of the period. The latter include samples
                    from the Septuagint (4 Kingdoms, Deuteronomy, Isaiah, 2 &amp; 4 Maccabees
                    and the like), most of the New Testament books, Philo, Josephus, Clement of
                    Rome, Ignatius of Antioch and Polycarp.
                The variables include a set of stylistic features which are mostly function
                    words: a set of sentence connectives equivalent to but, for, and, therefore, on
                    the one hand; a set of conjunctions which introduce clauses such as if, while,
                    in order that, where, whenever, and the like; a large set of prepositions such
                    as away from, into, out of, in, on account of, according to, after, with, about,
                    on, towards; and a set of (genitive) participle endings. These variables were
                    chosen as a set of function words suitable for inspecting the style of samples
                    of 1000 words. (It would be possible to extend the range of the linguistic
                    features by choosing much larger samples of those texts which have the necessary
                    bulk. Some, but not all, of the works are extensive.) Variables were selected in
                    the light of recent studies showing the effectiveness of high frequency words
                    and or features linked to syntax.
                The statistical method used was Correspondence Analysis as this plots both
                    samples and variables and allows one to see not only relations between texts,
                    but also those linguistic features which associate or separate the texts. CA was
                    run on a Sun machine shared by scores of other users. Correspondence Analysis
                    also differs from some other multivariate analysis in not requiring the data to
                    be normally distributed. This issue is a problem when samples from large numbers
                    of different authors are involved. Many stylometric studies limit themselves to
                    a handful of authors or even just two or three. This study is attempting to make
                    comparisons across a wide range of ancient literature.
                Using all the data we obtain a complete plot (OHP Cell 1) showing the location of
                    178 samples and 30 variables. This was the plot to which much careful attention
                    was given. But it is not an easy plot to interpret and for display purposes a
                    supplementary strategy provided an overview plot of cumulated samples - mostly
                    of 5000 words from 5 samples from each author combined together. This preserves
                    the broad shape and outline of the more complex plot. Each author still appears
                    in the same general segment of the plot as in the original. We can, however,
                    more easily see how the authors relate to each other and to the linguistic
                    variables. We can also interestingly see how the original plot reveals the wider
                    spread of 1000 word samples compared with the cumulated 5000 word samples. This
                    gives added insight into variation within the work or works of each author
                The main interpretation of the plots is that the more fluent Greek writers (i.e.
                    Polybius, Dionysius, Plutarch and their associates) lie to one side (right) of
                    the plot while the Septuagint translations of biblical texts lie to the other
                    side. (I use the term fluent to capture the more complex
                        observation that the writers who appear on the right of the plot are those
                        whose work would be regarded as more acceptable in style by an educated
                        Graeco-Roman public. Jerome is on record as being embarrassed by some
                        features of biblical Greek.) As the horizontal axis represents
                    Dimension 1 this captures the largest single component of the inertia. The
                    vertical axis seems to separate narrative texts lower down the plot from speech,
                    reported speech, treatises, and ordinary letters in the centre of the plot.
                    Paul's letters are even higher up the plot though neither to the extreme left
                    nor right. Paul's style is therefore between that of the Septuagint and that of
                    Dionysius on the one dimension, and much higher than the others on the vertical
                    dimension. This may reflect the very argumentative style of Paul's dictation in
                    his letters.
                The plots from Correspondence Analysis show the location of the variables in
                    relation to the location of the samples and from this we can draw inferences
                    which we can confirm by inspecting boxplots of means and other statistics. This
                    reveals the relative weight of usage of our main criteria in the different
                    writers. So for example we can see that Paul makes heavier use of alla, gar, ei,
                    ou, mh, hina (but, for, if, not, not, in order that) and to some extent dia and
                    eis (into), while making moderate use of de, oun, and men (but, therefore, on
                    the one hand). He has low usage of kai, meta and peri (and, after/with, about).
                    Much work on Paul has focused on internal differences of style. This study shows more clearly than before just how Paul
                        differs widely from most, but not all, of the other authors selected.
                    The Septuagint passages from Biblical texts have higher use of kai, apo and epi
                    (and, from, on)and to some extent hews (while/until), moderate use of ou (not),
                    and low usage of alla, gar, de, men, oun, ei, mh, kata and peri (but, for, but,
                    on the one hand, therefore, if, not, according to/against, about). But the Septuagint texts themselves differ and I conclude
                        that the differences are not just due to the style of samples from 4
                        Kingdoms, nor just to differences between translated texts and those
                        composed in Greek. The samples from Genesis and Proverbs lie between these
                        other Septuagintal groups. The more fluent Greek writers have higher
                    use of de, men, kata, peri (but, on the one hand, according to/against, about)
                    and the genitive participle endings, moderate use of alla, gar, ou, kai, and oun
                    (but, for, not, and, therefore), and low usage of hina and mh (in order that,
                    not). Here it is worth noting that despite his diffidence
                        Josephus is close on stylometric grounds to Dionysius and Plutarch. It is
                        also worth noting that the few selected samples from non-literary papyri are
                        not as far distant from Dionysius as some might expect. Finally we should
                        note that the Greek technical writers do not form a coherent group, as
                        Alexander and others tend to assume, but lie in several different directions
                        around the group including Dionysius and Plutarch. All these provisional
                        conclusions suggest lines for further investigation.
                Therefore (oun) is more heavily used in some NT texts esp. some Johannine texts.
                    The conjunction hopws (in order that) is mainly used by the more fluent Greeks.
                    The preposition ek (out of) is more heavily used in Revelation, moderately in
                    the Septuagint. The word en (in/by) is used more heavily in Colossians and
                    Ephesians and in some of the Johannine texts, and moderately high usage is also
                    found in the Septuagint and Paul. Philo and Josephus often side with the more
                    fluent Greeks on most criteria, but do have a raised usage of pros (towards).
                The results reported here make use of a larger selection of samples than any of
                    the previous work I have published on the stylometry of 1st Century Greek texts.
                    We can see not only that the writers fall into different groupings, but also
                    which literary criteria tend to distinguish their styles one from another.
                Some of the authors used could not provide further samples as their works are
                    relatively short. Others could provide massive amounts of further text for
                    analysis. That leaves plenty of scope for further researchers to explore the
                    more voluminous authors further, and perhaps, by taking much larger samples from
                    them, to scrutinize stylistic features of their work which appear slightly less
                    frequently than the highest frequency words and features which are the main
                    criteria used here.
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography:
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    L.
                                    Mealand
                                
                            
                            Style, Genre and Authorship in Acts, the Septuagint,
                                and Hellenistic Historians
                        
                        
                            Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                            
                                14
                                4
                                479-505 esp. 501-502
                                1999
                            
                        
                        a list of 29 relevant works will be found in
                    
                
            
            
                Plots:
                Plot of large text samples
                This plot shows the relative location of the different large cumulated samples of
                    text from the main authors. The samples from Genesis and Proverbs appear near
                    Acts on the more detailed plots: 2 and 4 Maccabees nearer Dionysius. Samples
                    from the papyri appear near Hebrews. Various Greek technical writers appear on
                    the more detailed plots above and below Polybius, well above Philo, to the right
                    of Acts and below Acts.
                Plot of literary variables
            
        
    
