


    
        
            
                New Directions in Interdisciplinary Electronic
                    Pedagogy: Practice, Process, Products
                
                    
                        Lissa
                        Holloway-Attaway
                        
                            Georgia Institute of Technology
                            lh47@prism.gatech.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Lisa
                        McNair
                        
                            Georgia Institute of Technology/University of Chicago
                            lisa.mcnair@lcc.gatech.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Mary
                        Carney
                        
                            Georgia Institute of Technology/University of Georgia
                            mary.carney@lcc.gatech.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Brandy
                        Walker
                        
                            Georgia Institute of Technology/Tulane University
                            brandy.walker@lcc.gatech.edu
                        
                    
                
                     
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Many computer-mediated communication theorists, particularly those engaged in
                        studies of writing-intensive humanities curricula, affirm the revisionary
                        possibilities for teaching and learning that emerge in the electronic
                        classroom. Recognizing that the introduction of educational technologies
                        into conventional humanist practice radically alters the sites and modes
                        through which meaning and identity unfold, they often celebrate the
                        revolutionary and utopian environments they find developing at the
                        human/computer intersection. In the most optimistic theoretical reflections,
                        computer-technologies and the e-texts they generate de- naturalize
                        communication and foreground the diverse functions, means, and processes of
                        writing, while providing faculty and students alike with opportunities to
                        consciously reflect on issues of discourse and literacy in both digital and
                        conventional contexts. As tools and texts merge, restrictive notions of
                        unitary identity and isolated authority and authorship are revised and re-
                        evaluated, as student-centered and -initiated collaborative learning
                        communities are constructed "on-the-fly." The computers' networking
                        functions extend beyond technical applications into social, political, and
                        rhetorical contexts, and the classroom reconstructs itself as a dynamic,
                        egalitarian site of exchange and reflection. However, for those engaged in
                        the actual realization of these theoretical pursuits, such optimism is often
                        difficult to sustain in the complex virtualities of a technology-infused
                        humanities classroom. In fact, a robust pedagogical support system is
                        necessary to negotiate the specific reconstructions (of identity, learning,
                        and practice) one confronts on the front-lines of the humanities computing
                        revolution.
                    The School of Literature, Communication, and Culture (LCC) at the Georgia
                        Institute of Technology offers a rich context in which to explore the
                        practical realities of electronic pedagogy, technical innovation, and
                        curricula development and delivery in humanities classes. LCC faculty share
                        a commitment to interdisciplinary work at the theoretical and applied levels
                        and integrate their interests in educational technologies and new media
                        research and development with conventional humanities studies. In
                        particular, the freshmen undergraduate writing program offers students a
                        dynamic technology-driven educational environment to explore computer
                        mediated communication and composition fundamentals through an
                        interdisciplinary cultural studies approach. While deploying custom-designed
                        synchronous, asynchronous, and hypertext applications within the curricula,
                        the program also offers an innovative and intensive electronic-pedagogy
                        support system for freshmen writing instructors to examine critically the
                        revolutionary practices in which they are engaged.
                    The individual panel discussions that follow explore the strategic objectives
                        necessary to sustain a critical perspective on humanities computing
                        initiatives, as well as provide specific examples that foreground
                        alternatively models of the practice, process, and products of
                        interdisciplinary electronic pedagogy. Collectively, they discuss positive
                        forms of resistance in pedagogical practice to counter utopian idealism,
                        while providing practical guidelines to navigate the inevitable dissensus
                        and chaos that results when humanities studies and technology intersect.
                        Each panel participant will prepare a 10-15 minute presentation leaving
                        considerable room for audience discussion of the key issues foregrounded in
                        the panel as a whole.
                
                
                    
                        Re(media)l Training: Developing an Integrated Pedagogical Support
                            System for Human|Computing Initiatives
                        Lissa Holloway-Attaway
                        
                            The integration of computers into humanities-studies requires the
                                development of attendant pedagogical methodologies to support the
                                new discourses and media that result, and LCC's interdisciplinary
                                writing program provides a critical and instructional framework to
                                support the rich educational opportunities it creates. In her
                                presentation, Lissa Holloway-Attaway will provide an overview of
                                LCC's Brittain Teaching Fellows and Electronic Pedagogy Certificate
                                programs to demonstrate the ways in which pedagogical and curricular
                                development can combine with technological initiatives to provide a
                                strong foundation for humanities computing research. The Brittain
                                Teaching Fellows, who comprise the majority of freshman writing
                                instructors, are recruited in a national search from a variety of
                                disciplines and bring a range of critical approaches to explore
                                technology- infused communications within a cultural studies
                                context. Additionally, their participation in a two-year Electronic
                                Pedagogy Certificate program creates a sustained and
                                critically-informed approach to the use of electronic technologies
                                and media within humanities programs. The self-reflective and
                                recursive practices in which they are engaged establish a core
                                community of researchers who participate in the strategic
                                development of tools, media, and resources within the established
                                interdisciplinary curricula. By examining the institutional
                                motivations and pedagogical objectives informing the development of
                                LCC's interdisciplinary structure and reviewing the tools deployed
                                within the curricula, Holloway-Attaway will reveal both the benefits
                                and challenges of resisting discipline-specific education.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        2) TITLE: "Practicing Ethnography in and out of the Electronic
                            Pedagogy Classroom"
                        Lisa McNair
                        
                            Ethnography is semi-scientific inquiry into human cultures. It is
                                scientific because it is a process of gathering, organizing and
                                presenting empirical data. It is semi-scientific because ethnography
                                employs an interpretive, humanistic methodology that must account
                                for not only its subject of study but also the nature of the
                                investigation itself. Thus, ethnographic studies are necessarily
                                self-reflexive projects. Electronic pedagogy enables students to
                                observe, analyze and engage in practices of ethnography using
                                multimedia tools that expand the notion of "text."
                            In her presentation, Lisa McNair will examine the ways in which
                                ethnographic studies in technology-infused curricula offer
                                innovative and highly complex opportunities for students to engage
                                in an interpretive analysis of the role and function of the
                                authorial subject. In her course focusing on the culture of the
                                American South, students develop methods of seeing the world around
                                them as a collection of interpretations, including their own
                                individualized viewpoints. Research on the world-wide-web produces a
                                plethora of interdisciplinary ethnography projects already completed
                                and presented. Along with these original offerings, there are many
                                re-presentations of earlier ethnographies, some evocative of the
                                original work, some extremely skewed. Too often the web presents
                                only that which glitters, satisfying ephemeral curiosity instead of
                                delving into "thick description." In these radically condensed and
                                sometimes exploitative presentations lies the opportunity to analyze
                                the primary and secondary practices of gathering material,
                                interpreting, and then presenting it to an audience. Indeed, this is
                                the descriptive task that students complete by using several
                                collaborative and individual methods implemented through technology
                                programs provided by the department. Individually, students compare
                                various texts — written material, photo-documentaries, spoken
                                interviews, and film projects — using reproductions enhanced by
                                image, audio and video files. In groups, students meet in electronic
                                spaces to compile findings, discuss their interpretations and build
                                structured presentations. Both collaborative and individual
                                presentations mirror the multi-faceted reality of perspective: by
                                re-presenting the re-presented and moving through different media,
                                students practice methods of interpretation and examine voluble
                                concepts of fact vs. fiction. Finally, students conduct their own
                                fieldwork, armed with humanistic ways of seeing and electronic
                                methods for illustrating their perspectives.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        3) TITLE: "The Writing Process: Teaching Discursive Practices in an
                            Electronic Environment"
                        Mary Carney
                        
                            The theoretical approach to writing as a complex amalgam of both
                                discrete and intertwining activities can be productively realized by
                                using the medium of computers to foreground the process. Electronic
                                environments are not only conducive to teaching writing as a process
                                but to exposing idealistic notions of writing as an intuitive and
                                natural exercise. In addition, electronic pedagogy helps to make the
                                discursive practices of a writing intensive course more concrete.
                            In her presentation, Mary Carney analyzes humanities computing as a
                                methodology to foreground the writing process and simultaneously
                                provide a concrete engagement with the theoretical and critical
                                practices of cultural studies. For the final project in her course
                                that examines representations of warfare, students engage in
                                interdisciplinary analysis of a war artifact by integrating a
                                description of one war technology, a brief history of its inception,
                                and an analysis of one of its cultural implications. The writing
                                process throughout this project is made visible through a number of
                                assignments using custom- designed electronic tools. Through
                                synchronous and asynchronous modes of communication, in both
                                conventional and electronic discussion, students highlight and
                                practice the "process" of writing with clearly defined assignments
                                designed to foster an awareness of not only their own discursive
                                practices but of their fellow students and of a broader research
                                community. The writing intensive assignments developed through a
                                variety of electronic conferencing applications encourage early
                                "play" with relevant discourses and contribute to the ultimate
                                acquisition of complex critical vocabularies and approaches. For
                                undergraduates, online and conventional resource materials can
                                easily overwhelm students and restrict them to an unfocussed cycle
                                of research and revision, impeding their ability to find appropriate
                                critical approaches to their subject. Collaborative electronic
                                spaces provide opportunities to practice revision skills and to
                                comprehend research as a form of critical practice where authorial
                                identity must be challenged. While mediating the complex discourse
                                communities they create and critique, students must confront the
                                chaos of multiple authorship and uncertain authority in the
                                electronic environments that both uphold and disrupt their
                                rhetorical practices.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        4) TITLE: “A Century of Collaboration: The Products of Electronic
                            Research”
                        Brandy Brown Walker
                        
                            Humanities computing enterprises offer new ways to conceptualize
                                learning as a collaborative process. Collaborative efforts in turn
                                provide more holistic understandings of discipline specific and
                                interdisciplinary topics. Electronic pedagogy provides students with
                                the tools and strategies to approach their topic from a variety of
                                disciplinary perspectives in order to maximize the potential for
                                learning. Such potentials allow educators to help students move from
                                traditional assignments isolated from other students’ products, to
                                assignments that both supplement and engage in conversation with
                                other students’ work. Courses that focus on interdisciplinary
                                collaboration can then potentially develop resources that have both
                                more breadth and depth than students working in more traditional and
                                discrete modes could produce.
                            In her presentation, Brandy Walker will explore the benefits and
                                challenges that collaboration brings to interdisciplinary pursuits.
                                Students in her course on science, technology and culture ultimately
                                build a database of information and research that reflects both
                                individual scholarship and collaborative production of materials.
                                Moving through a series of assignments that provide breadth to a
                                historical investigation of advancements in science and technology
                                and their impacts on culture, to assignments that explore in depth
                                specific circumstances surrounding particular inventions and
                                discoveries, Walker’s class collaboratively builds a web of timeline
                                and research resources. The final product of this course is a
                                collaborative resource of student work informed by interdisciplinary
                                goals achieved through committed application of electronic pedagogy.
                                When the learning process reflects a multiplicity of research
                                efforts, students gain a more comprehensive view of their subject.
                                In this course, a century of science, technology and culture would
                                be inconceivable without the collaboration that new directions in
                                interdisciplinary electronic pedagogy provide. However, such rewards
                                are not without consequences; both students and instructors face
                                challenges in negotiating and strategically managing the process
                                through with these collaborative efforts are realized.
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
