


    
        
            
                Stylometric Analysis Using Discriminant Analysis: A
                    Study of Sherlock Holmes Stories
                
                    
                        Peter
                        Smith
                        
                            The City University London
                            peters@soi.city.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    Stylometric analysis may be defined as the quantitative analysis of the
                        recurrence of particular features of style for the purpose of deducing
                        authorship and/or chronology of texts. Methods of sylometric analysis may be
                        broadly subdivided up into lexical and non-lexical approaches (Binongo
                        2000). The approach to be taken in this study is to use function words using
                        discriminant analysis as a method of analysis. The use of function words has
                        often been criticised by stylistic experts as lacking in scientific
                        validity, for example, see (Waith 1984). An ultimate aim of this work is to
                        establish scientific foundations for the use of function words in
                        stylometric analysis. One promising line of enquiry is in the study of
                        aphasic patients where it has been suggested that function words may be
                        processed by the brain separately to lexical words (Garrett 1982), perhaps
                        we may have less conscious control over our use of them.
                    Three plausible variables for stylometric analysis to consider are:
                        chronology, genre and author. A writer's stylistic tendencies cannot be
                        assumed to span an entire writing career, hence when the work was written is
                        just as important as who wrote it. Similarly, it is unreasonable to assume
                        that style will be fixed in different genres. One aim of this study is to
                        fix two of the three variables as closely as possible while studying the
                        effect of the other variable.
                
                
                    The Basis for this Study
                    The primary basis for this study is to examine the effectiveness of
                        discriminant analysis using function words as a means of distinguishing
                        author while examining the effect of genre and time. The Sherlock Holmes
                        stories of Arthur Conan-Doyle were chosen as subjects for study because they
                        were freely available in machine-readable form and there were several
                        comparable texts written at the same time in the same basic genre. Arthur
                        Conan Doyle was also a prolific writer who has written different types of
                        fiction very closely in time.
                    The Sherlock Holmes stories were originally serialised in The Strand Magazine. However, when "The Hound of the
                        Baskervilles" appeared it was plagued with controversy. Arthur Conan Doyle
                        had insisted that his name appear jointly with a Mr. Fletcher Robinson. It
                        has been suggested that Fletcher Robinson had written part of the story, in
                        which case stylometric analysis might be able to throw light on this
                        mystery. However, if Conan-Doyle was just given an idea for a story then
                        there is not much that can be discovered by this technique.
                    Nine texts were chosen for analysis, which can be divided into three equal
                        groups: 
                            Sherlock Holmes stories, including The Hound of
                                    the Baskervilles, as close in time as possible to it.
                            Other works written by Conan Doyle at the same time as the three
                                Sherlock Holmes stories.
                            Other works by different writers in the same or similar genre
                                (including some published in The Strand
                                Magazine).
                        
                    The sets of Sherlock Holmes stories that were written closest in time were
                        chosen as comparand texts (note that all stories were serialised and
                        published monthly). Thus the three Sherlock Holmes stories were: The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes (1892/3), The Hound of the Baskervilles (1902) and The Return of Sherlock Holmes (1904) (Conan-Doyle
                        1986). The three comparand texts written by Conan-Doyle around the same time
                        were: The Parasite. (1894) The
                            Adventures of Gerard (1903) and Sir
                        Nigel (1906).The three texts written in a similar genre around the
                        same time but by different authors were: The Ponsonby
                            Diamonds (Meale and Halifax 1894 - published in The Strand Magazine). The Old Man in the
                            Corner (Baroness Orczy 1901)and The Scarlet
                            Pimpernel (Baroness Orczy 1905).
                    The texts were prepared in a manner that follow the technique employed by
                        (Smith 1993) very closely. The top 20 most commonly occurring function words
                        from "The Hound of the Baskervilles" were chosen. A discriminant analysis
                        was then run using SPSS 10.00 with the three texts forming three groups.
                        This produced a "nearness" metric for the texts. A series of tests will be
                        presented that provide a strong basis for the use of discriminant analysis.
                        The tests demonstrate the ability of this technique to separate texts by
                        author, by genre (when author is fixed), or even by time. Tests were also
                        carried out to ensure that the tests were not just arbitrary, but showed a
                        real variation in texts.
                
                
                    Discussion and Further Work
                    The starting point for this research was to investigate whether there is any
                        evidence to support the thesis that Conan-Doyle may not have written all of
                        "The Hound of the Baskervilles". There is absolutely no support for this in
                        the results. The technique attempted to test for authorship by attempting to
                        control two other major variables: time and genre. It was capable of
                        distinguishing texts by author consistently. It also appeared to have the
                        capability for separation of texts by genre and separated Conan-Doyle's
                        works by time as well (The Hound of the
                        Baskervilles was closer to The Return of Sherlock
                            Holmes, written only two years later, than it was to The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes, written some 9 years
                        earlier.)
                    One possible reason why the Sherlock Holmes stories differ from, the story
                        used as a comparand text in a different genre might be because they employ a
                        considerable amount of spoken dialogue, whereas the other story chosen
                        contains far more narrative text. This has yet to be investigated.
                    Principal Components Analysis (PCA) has been successfully used in stylometric
                        analysis, (Burrows 1987, Binongo 2000, Binongo and Smith 1999). (Binongo
                        2000) seems overly pessimistic in his dismissal of discriminatory analysis,
                        arguing against its use because of the assumption of multivariate normality.
                        However his work reveals several worrying aspects of the use of principal
                        components analysis. Firstly: the most frequent words tend to have the least
                        discriminatory power and the first principal component may not be able to
                        reveal authorship accurately. If the frequencies of function words are
                        standardised, this in turn may lead more frequent words to be swamped by
                        less frequent words. (Binongo and Smith 1999) demonstrated that PCA was
                        capable of distinguishing difference in genres in a comparison between the
                        essays and plays of Oscar Wilde. In a later study (Binongo and Smith 1999)
                        they also demonstrated the success of this technique on a comparison of the
                        works of two contemporaneous American authors Nathaniel Hawthorne and Herman
                        Melville using 25 function words.
                    Principal Components Analysis was also employed on the texts used in this
                        study and although it appeared to reliably differentiate between three
                        different authors, the principal components appeared to be less reliable in
                        different genre tests and especially where two groups were from the same
                        text. In this case the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin statistic, measuring sampling
                        adequacy (Kaiser 1970) indicated that the extracted components might be
                        unreliable. Kaiser (1974) recommends accepting values greater than 0.5 and
                        even values between 0.5 and 0.7 are considered mediocre (see also Field
                        2000). When PCA was applied to the same text split into two groups, KMO
                        scores of between 0.4 and 0.55 were observed.
                    Experiments with the numbers of function words were also tried. It was found
                        that increasing the set of function words from 20 to 25 or 30 made only a
                        marginal difference. Running a MANOVA test on the function word data allowed
                        us to identify function words that were unreliable and re-running a
                        discriminant analysis with these words removed produced a slight
                        improvement. As the number of function words was decreased progressively the
                        sensitivity of the test was diminished. The drawback with this approach is
                        that it requires large amounts of text to produce reliable results
                        (something approaching the size of a novella or short novel as minimum). The
                        test will not be so sensitive to the insertion or interleaving of texts by
                        different authors. If a form of dimension reduction can be established, then
                        it might be possible to treat a text as a time series and use a window to
                        drag over the text to look for anomalous sections that might indicate a
                        change of author. A further way in which this work can be developed is to
                        examine the function words themselves and examine why each author varies
                        their usage. Some function words are used as what Schiffrin (1987) calls
                        discourse markers and as higher-level indicators of structure, their use may
                        well vary from one writer to the next. A linguistic basis for the variation
                        in function words needs to be established if only to demonstrate the
                        scientific credentials for stylometric analysis.
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    N.
                                    G.
                                    Binongo
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    W.
                                    Smith
                                
                            
                            The Application of principal components analysis to
                                stylometry
                        
                        
                            Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                            
                                14
                                4
                                445-466
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    N.
                                    G.
                                    Binongo
                                
                            
                            Stylometry and its implementation by Principal
                                Components Analysis
                        
                        
                            Ph.D. Thesis
                            
                                University of Ulster, Co. Antrim, Northern Ireland, UK
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    F.
                                    Burrows
                                
                            
                            Computation into Criticism: A Study of Jane Austin's
                                Novels and an experiment in Method
                            
                                Oxford
                                Clarendon
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Arthur
                                    Conan
                                    Doyle
                                
                            
                            The Illustrated Sherlock Holmes
                            
                                London
                                Omega Books
                                1986
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Field
                                
                            
                            Discovering Statistics using SPSS for Windows
                            
                                London
                                Sage Publications
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    F.
                                    Garrett
                                
                            
                            Production of Speech: Observations from Normal and
                                Pathological Language Use
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Ellis
                                
                            
                            Normality and Pathology in Cognitive Functions
                            
                                London
                                Academic Press
                                1982
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    F.
                                    Kaiser
                                
                            
                            A Second Generation little jiffy
                        
                        
                            Psychometrika
                            
                                35
                                
                                401-415
                                1970
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    F.
                                    Kaiser
                                
                            
                            An Index of factorial simplicity
                        
                        
                            Psychometrika
                            
                                39
                                
                                31-36
                                1974
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Schriffrin
                                
                            
                            Discourse Markers
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    W.
                                    Smith
                                
                            
                            Edmund Ironside
                        
                        
                            Notes and Queries
                            
                                238
                                
                                202-5
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    M.
                                    Waith
                                
                            
                            Titus Andronicus: The Oxford Shakespeare
                            
                                
                                Oxford University Press
                                1984
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
