


    
        
            
                Bridging disciplinary boundaries: A case study of the
                    Music Information Retrieval Annotated Bibliography Project
                
                    
                        J.
                        Stephen
                        Downie
                        
                            Graduate School of Library and Information Science,
                            University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
                            jdownie@uiuc.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Background
                    Music information retrieval (MIR) research and development strives to afford
                        the same level of access to the world's corpus of music as is afforded to
                        text. Recently concluded international symposia devoted to MIR research and
                        development bear witness to the promise of powerful, robust, large-scale,
                        and flexible search and retrieval tools designed to be used by scholars and
                        novices alike (ISMIR 2000; ISMIR 2001). Like many other humanities computing
                        endeavours, it has attracted a multi-disciplinary group of researchers who
                        are applying their domain-specific expertise to the wide range of challenges
                        inherent in MIR development. MIR researchers come from library science,
                        musicology, music theory, music psychology, computer science, digital and
                        traditional librarianship, audio engineering, information science,
                        information retrieval, publishing, media studies, broadcasting, law, and
                        business, to name only a small handful of the disciplines represented. MIR
                        research is all the stronger for the cross-pollination of disciplinary
                        paradigms, research methods, and technological approaches. Effective
                        communications across disciplinary boundaries, however, are impeding the
                        coalescence of MIR research into a coherent discipline in its own right. The
                        nascent MIR community is plagued with two forms of communications breakdown:
                            1. The scattering of the MIR literature caused by a lack of
                                bibliographic control; and,
                            2. The confusion brought about by the use of discipline-specific
                                assumptions, techniques, and language throughout its
                                literature.
                        
                    My paper reports upon the background, framework, goals and ongoing
                        development of the Music Information Retrieval Annotated Bibliography
                        Project (). It extends and augments the
                        preliminary explication presented in Downie (2001). This project is being
                        undertaken to specifically address and overcome the bibliographic control
                        and communications issues plaguing the MIR research community. However,
                        since most humanities computing projects also draw upon multi-disciplinary
                        groups of researchers, I to hope provide and delineate a model that should
                        assist others in facilitating efficient and effective communications among
                        their particular research communities.
                
                
                    Problem Overview
                    MIR research has no disciplinary home. Because of this, researchers have been
                        publishing their findings within the contexts of their own disciplines.
                        Important MIR papers are thus scattered, for example, across the computer
                        science, library science, musicology, humanities, and audio engineering
                        literatures. There is no comprehensive indexing tool that successfully
                        gathers up these papers. For example, significant musicology-based advances
                        can be located through various music, arts and humanities indexes but not
                        through the engineering and computer science indexes. Advances in audio
                        engineering techniques are similarly absent from the music, arts and
                        humanities indexes. Since researchers are generally unaware of the
                        differences in scope of the various discipline-based indexes, they tend to
                        focus upon those with which they are most familiar and thus overlook the
                        contributions of those based in other disciplines. Unfamiliarity with the
                        wide range of vocabularies used by the various disciplines further compounds
                        the communication difficulties by making it problematic for MIR
                        investigators to conduct thorough and comprehensive searches for MIR
                        materials. Until these issues are addressed, MIR will never be in a position
                        to fully realize the benefits that a multi-disciplinary research and
                        development community offers, nor will it be able to develop into a
                        discipline in its own right.
                
                
                    Solution
                    
                    Our solution to the issues outlined above centers about the creation of a
                        Web-based, two-level, collection of annotated bibliographies (Fig. 1). The
                        first level, or core bibliography, will bring together those items
                        identified as being germane to MIR as a nascent discipline. Thus, the core
                        bibliography comprises only those papers dealing specifically with some
                        aspect of the MIR problem, such as MIR system development, experimentation,
                        and evaluation, etc. The second level, or periphery bibliographies, comprise
                        a set of discipline-specific bibliographies. Each discipline-specific
                        bibliography in the set will provide access to the discipline-specific
                        background materials necessary for non-expert members of the other
                        disciplines to comprehend and evaluate the papers from each participating
                        discipline. For example, an audio engineering bibliography could be used by
                        music librarians and others to understand the basics of signal processing
                        (e.g., Fast Fourier Transforms, etc.). Another example would be a musicology
                        bibliography that computer scientists could draw upon in an effort to
                        understand the strengths and weaknesses of the various music encoding
                        schemes, and so on. Thus, taken together, the two-levels of the MIR
                        bibliography will provide:
                            1. The much needed bibliographic control to the MIR literature;
                                and,
                            2. An important a mechanism for members of each discipline to
                                comprehend the contributions of the other disciplines. 
                        
                    An important operating principle of the project is the use of non-proprietary
                        formats and software. We are committed to the ideals of the Open Source
                        Initiative (OSI, 2001) and the GNU General Public License (GNU Project,
                        2001) and thus intend to make our innovations freely available to others. In
                        keeping with this commitment, we have chosen the Greenstone Digital Library
                        Software (GSDL) package (New Zealand Digital Library Project, 2001), the
                        Apache HTTP server (Apache Software Foundation, 2001), the PERL scripting
                        language (PERL Mongers, 2001) and the Linux operating system (Linux Online,
                        2001) to create the basic technological foundation of the project. We have
                        purchased copies of the commercial bibliographic software package, ProCite
                        (ISI ResearchSoft, 2001) for initial, in-house, data-entry. ProCite also
                        provides us with a representative instance of commercially available
                        software that many end-users might utilize in manipulating the records they
                        retrieve from our bibliography.
                    At present, there are two central components of project undergoing
                        development and alpha testing:
                            1. The bibliographic search and retrieval interface using the GSDL
                                package; and,
                            2. The Web-based end-user data entry system.
                        
                    For both of these, the goal is to create a system that will permit ongoing
                        viability of the bibliography by minimizing-but not necessarily
                        eliminating-the amount of human editorial intervention required. Item ^#1
                        issues being addressed include modifications to the basic GSDL system to
                        permit the importation of specially structured bibliographic records and
                        their subsequent access through a variety of field selection options. Item
                        ^#2 is a CGI-based input system that guides end-users through the process of
                        constructing well-structured bibliographic records through a series of
                        step-by-step interactions and the on-the-fly generation of input forms
                        specifically designed to provide the appropriate fields for the various
                        types of bibliographic source materials (i.e., journal articles, conference
                        papers, theses, etc.).
                    Now that the general framework for the core bibliography has been laid, we
                        are moving forward on the acquisition of the supplementary and explanatory
                        materials. For these we are drawing upon the expert advice of those that
                        have graciously signed on as advisors to the project. These advisors are not
                        only lending their disciplinary expertise but are also affording us a very
                        important multinational perspective on the potential uses and growth of the
                        bibliography.
                
                
                    Acknowledgements
                    I would like to thank Dr. Suzanne Lodato for helping the project obtain its
                        principal financial support from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. I would
                        also like to thank Dr. Radha Nandkumar and the National Center for
                        Supercomputing Applications Faculty Fellows Programme for their support. The
                        hard work and insightful advice of Karen Medina, Joe Futrelle, Dr. David
                        Dubin, and the other members of the Information Science Research Laboratory
                        at the Graduate School of Library and Information Science, UIUC, is
                        gratefully appreciated. Those members of the MIR research community who have
                        volunteered to act as project advisors are also thanked.
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Apache Software Foundation
                            
                            Apache project
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                        Available at .
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Stephen
                                    Downie
                                
                            
                            [Poster abstract] The music information retrieval annotated bibliography
                            project, phase I
                        
                        
                            Proceeding of the Second International Symposium on
                                Music Information Retrieval, 15-17 October, 2001, Bloomington,
                                IN
                            
                                Bloomington, IN
                                Indiana University
                                2001
                            
                        
                        Available at: 
                    
                    
                        
                            NU Project
                        
                        Free software licenses
                        
                            
                            
                            2001
                        
                    Available at:  
                    
                        
                            ISI Researchsoft
                        
                        ProCite
                        Version 5
                        
                            
                            
                            2001
                        
                    Available at: .
                    
                        
                            ISMIR 2000
                        
                        The International Symposium on Music Information Retrieval, 23-25 October, 2000, Plymouth, MA
                        
                            
                            
                            2000
                        
                    Available at: 
                    
                        
                            ISMIR 2001
                        
                        The Second International Symposium on Music Information Retrieval, 15-17 October, 2001, Bloomington, IN
                        
                            
                            
                            2001
                        
                    Available at: 
                    
                        
                            Linux Online
                        
                        The Linux homepage
                        
                            
                            
                            2001
                        
                    Available at: 
                    
                        
                            New Zealand Digital Library Project
                        
                        About the Greenstone software
                        
                            
                            
                            2001
                        
                    Available at: 
                    
                    
                        
                            Open Source Initiative
                        
                        The open source definition
                        version 1.9
                        
                            
                            
                            2001
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Perl Mongers
                        
                        Perl Mongers: The PERL advocacy people
                        
                            
                            
                            2001
                        
                    Available at: 
                
            
        
    
