


    
        
            
                Meaning and interpretation of concurrent markup
                
                    
                        Andreas
                        Witt
                        
                            Universität Bielefeld
                            Andreas.Witt@uni-bielefeld.de
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    The difficulty of annotating not hierarchically structured text with
                        SGML-based mark-up languages is a problem that has often been addressed.
                        Renear et al. (1996) discuss one of the basic assumptions about the
                        structure of text data: the "OHCO-thesis", which states that text consists
                        of an ordered hierarchy of content objects, and show that this assumption
                        cannot be upheld consistently: A number of texts contradict this
                        OHCO-thesis.
                    The options to represent data which correspond to different structural
                        hierarchies are discussed in detail by the TEI (see Barnard et al. 1995).
                        One type of annotation mentioned by the TEI-guidelines consists of
                        separately annotating the original data according to different document
                        grammars. "The advantages of this method of markup are that each way of
                        looking at the information is explicitly represented in the data, and may be
                        processed in straightforward ways, without requiring complex methods of
                        disentangling information relevant to one view from information relevant
                        only to other views." (Sperberg-McQueen &amp; Burnard 1994, p.775f.) The
                        problem, however, is that separate annotations do not allow for establishing
                        relations between the annotation tiers. It will be shown that a model for
                        the meaning and interpretation of documents, marked-up once, can be extended
                        to documents concurrently marked-up with several annotations.The
                            work presented here is described in more detail in Witt
                        (2002).
                
                
                    Model of representation
                    The model of representing complex structured text is itself based on the data
                        to be structured. This data can be annotated according to specific document
                        grammars. For a simple case there is one document grammar and one
                        annotation. This means all SGML documents and all valid XML documents are
                        represented by this model. In addition to this standard representation every
                        document can be structured according to further document grammars. The
                        maximal number of annotations is not restricted, so that the model permits a
                        steady expansion of the annotations which are used. Therefore, the model can
                        be viewed as an open model. As a result the annotated text data fuses
                        different levels of annotation together.
                    As a prerequisite the preparation of the data must be done in a way that a
                        separate annotation of relevant phenomena is possible. The data which will
                        be annotated is categorized as having a status of primary data. The primary
                        data consists of the yet to be annotated text. Accordingly, the mark-up will
                        be categorized as secondary data or meta-data.The terminus
                            "meta-data" is preferred by the author, because "secondary data"
                            presupposes a characterization as less important data. However,
                            "meta-data" is far from being the ideal term: it causes an ambiguity,
                            since it is also used for the information typically contained in the
                            headers of annotated documents. The primary data is used in two
                        ways: On the one hand, the primary data is the subject of several (possible)
                        annotations, on the other hand it forms a link between the levels of
                        annotation. It is important to note that the second way of using the primary
                        data allows for linking the independent annotations without introducing
                        explicit links.
                    After the stipulation of the primary data individual document grammars can be
                        developed and applied which each pertain to a single level of annotation.
                        For the annotation of linguistic data this could be e.g. the level of
                        morphology, the level of syllable structures, a level of syntactic
                        categories (e.g. noun, verb), a level of syntactic functions (e.g. subject,
                        object), or a level of semantic roles (e.g. agent, instrument).
                    As already mentioned this annotation technique data allows for the
                        introduction of an unlimited number of concurrent annotations, but there
                        exists a constraint: when designing the document grammar it is necessary to
                        consider that the primary data is the link between all layers of annotation.
                        This has a direct consequence for the modelling process: Even if parts of
                        the primary data are irrelevant for one of the tiers of description, the
                        data must exist as primary data in the annotation. This contradiction can be
                        solved by introducing a special mark for this irrelevant primary data in the
                        document grammar according to the phenomena. This mark allows one to
                        represent the corresponding passages as primary data in a technical way.
                        Such a mark can be done for example by using the element &lt;ignore&gt;. While interpreting the
                        distinguished data these marked sections will be filtered out. Durand et al.
                        (1996) already discussed a similar solution where a classification on a more
                        abstract level of representation should happen.
                    The compilation of document grammars which are used for different
                        annotations, can be seen as a pool of individual units or as a collectively
                        structured source of knowledge. Not only the structure of document grammars,
                        but also the schema language used (e.g. DTD, XSchema) are irrelevant to the
                        process of annotations.
                
                
                    Knowledge representation of annotated text
                    In general, annotated text consists of content and annotations. Annotations
                        are used on a syntactical level. Therefore they are used for assigning a
                        meaning to (parts of) a document. While developing a document grammar the
                        focus should be centred on the content. This point of view is expressed by
                        Sperberg-McQueen, Huitfeldt and Renear (2000). They show how knowledge which
                        is syntactically coded into text by annotations can be extracted by
                        knowledge inference. After summarizing this approach, it will be shown, how
                        this technique can be expanded so that it can be used for inferences of
                        separately annotated and implicitly linked documents - documents marked-up
                        according to different document grammars.
                
                
                    Documents
                    Sperberg-McQueen et al. (2000) regard annotated documents as a compilation of
                        knowledge which can be represented and can be used for inference.
                        Illustrating their approach they use the programming language "Prolog" to
                        represent this knowledge. A XML-Document without cross relations can be
                        represented as a tree. A representation of annotated text in Prolog looks
                        like the following:
                        node([x, y, z], element(gi)).
                        
                        attr([x, y, z],attr-name, 'att-value').
                    A predicate with two arguments, called node (or
                        short notation in Prolog node/2), is used. The
                        first argument is a list of digits to identify each node of the tree
                        representation of documents. The second argument is more complex. It
                        consists of the functor element or pcdata and an argument for the name of the
                        element or the textual content. Furthermore, a predicate of three arguments
                        called attr/3 is used for representing
                        attributes. Attributes are also related to nodes (argument 1). They have a
                        name (argument 2) and a value (argument 3). Such a representation of a
                        document is a very good basis for automatic inference of relations which
                        exist between the nodes. If e.g. infer/2 is
                        called with an address, all active features can be printed out:
                        infer(Property,[x, y, z]).
                        
                        Property = a;
                     If infer/2 is called with a concrete feature
                        and a variable at the place of the address, all locations are printed out
                        which apply to these features.
                    Other frameworks for knowledge representation of annotated documents also
                        exist. Welty and Ide (1999) introduced an approach, where the knowledge of
                        documents is pasted into a knowledge representation system. However, so far
                        it has not been shown how to use differently annotated documents as a base
                        for inferences.
                
                
                    Relations between separate annotations
                    The described model of knowledge representation can only be used for single
                        documents. However, it will be shown, that this model can easily be
                        expanded, so that it is applicable for the inference of relations between
                        several separately annotated XML-documents with the same primary data.
                    In order to use the model for several different annotations the
                        representation of an absolute system of references must be introduced. This
                        absolute reference system is already given in the data: the parts of text
                        which are saved as "PCDATA", i.e. the primary data as defined above, is
                        ideally suited for this task. This means that the string which is identical
                        in all documents serves as the absolute system of references.
                    The primary data forms a string of a fixed length. The representation of the
                        annotation tiers is an absolute basis of relations. This basis must renounce
                        the predicates node/2 and attr/3 in favour of the predicates node/5 and attr/6. The three
                        additional arguments are used for the reference on the level of annotation
                        (comparable to the concept of namespaces in XML), for marking the start and
                        the end of the annotated textual content.
                    The extension of the original model in this way allows for inferences of
                        relations between different concurrent annotations, e.g. regarding the
                        separate annotation of morphemes and syllables might show that these units
                        are not compatible.Other relations of concurrent markup can be,
                            for example, compatibility, identity, and inclusion. Since the
                        arguments originally introduced are reused, all the inferences of the
                        original model are still possible.
                
                
                    Advantages and Perspectives
                    The outlined architecture has many advantages. The model allows for
                        structuring text according to multiple concurrent document grammars without
                        workarounds. Furthermore additional annotations can be subsequently
                        included, without changing already established annotations. The annotations
                        are on the one hand independent of each other, on the other hand they are
                        interrelated via the text, allowing for the inference of relations between
                        different levels of annotation. The final advantage to be mentioned is that
                        the compatibility of several or all annotations used can be proven
                        automatically. This can be done using a technique originally developed
                        within linguistics, namely unification.
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                    David
                                    Barnard
                                et al
                            Hierarchical Encoding of Text: Technical Problems and
                                SGML Solutions
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Nancy
                                    Ide
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jean
                                    Véronis
                                
                            
                            TEI: Background and Context
                            
                                
                                Kluwer
                                1995
                                211-231
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Durand
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Elli
                                    Mylonas
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Stephen
                                    DeRose
                                
                            
                            What Should Markup Really Be?
                        
                        
                            ALLC/ACH 1996
                            
                                
                                
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Nancy
                                    Ide
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jean
                                    Véronis
                                
                            
                            TEI: Background and Context
                            
                                
                                Kluwer
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Elli
                                    Mylonas
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Durand
                                
                            
                            Refining Our Notion of What Text Really Is: The Problem
                                of Overlapping Hierarchies
                        
                        
                            ALLC/ACH 1992
                            
                                
                                Clarendon
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Lou
                                    Burnard
                                
                            
                            TEI-Guidelines (P3)
                            
                                
                                
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Claus
                                    Huitfeldt
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            Meaning and interpretation of Markup
                        
                        
                            Markup Languages
                            
                                MIT Press
                                2
                                3
                                215-234
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Chris
                                    Welty
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Nancy
                                    Ide
                                
                            
                            Using the right tools: enhancing retrieval from
                                marked-up documents
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                Kluwer
                                33
                                1-2
                                59-84
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Andreas
                                    Witt
                                
                            
                            Multiple Informationsstrukturierung mit
                                Auszeichnungssprachen. XML-basierte Methoden und deren Nutzen für
                                die Sprachtechnologie
                        
                        
                            Ph.D. thesis
                            
                                Bielefeld University
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
