


    
        
            
                METS: The Metadata Encoding Transmission Standard
                
                    
                        Merrilee
                        Proffitt
                        
                            RLG
                            mgp@notes.rlg.org
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Birgit
                        Stehno
                        
                            MetaE Project
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Alexander
                        Egger
                        
                            MetaE Project
                            alex@sbox.tu-graz.ac.at
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Thornton
                        Staples
                        
                            University of Virginia
                            tls@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    METS is a generalized metadata framework, developed to encode the structural
                        metadata for objects within a digital library and related descriptive and
                        administrative metadata. Those currently involved with or planning
                        digitization will want to hear about METS, which can help to structure data
                        for presentation and/or archiving.
                    Expressed using the XML schema language of the World Wide Web Consortium,
                        METS provides for the responsible management and transfer of digital library
                        objects by bundling and storing appropriate metadata along with the digital
                        objects. The use of a single, flexible means of encoding can simplify both
                        the exchange of objects between repositories and the development of software
                        tools for search and display of those objects. Additionally, METS encoding
                        will provide a coherent means for archiving digital objects and their
                        metadata. The METS initiative has two major components. On the technical
                        side, the initiative seeks to provide a single, standard mechanism for
                        encoding all forms of metadata for digital library objects. On the
                        organizational side, the group looks towards developing mechanisms for
                        maintenance and further development of the format, including establishing a
                        METS testbed and METS tools.
                    The first paper will provide a basic introduction to METS and will outline
                        the objectives and progress and of the METS initiative to date. The second
                        two papers will be reports from the field. Each project will give
                        organizational background and context to their work, and will explain how
                        METS may help the projects meet their objectives.
                
                
                    
                        Introduction to METS
                        Merrilee Proffitt
                        
                            
                                METS is a generalized metadata framework, developed to encode the
                                    structural metadata for objects within a digital library and
                                    related descriptive and administrative metadata. METS provides
                                    for the responsible management and transfer of digital library
                                    objects by bundling and storing appropriate metadata along with
                                    the digital objects.
                                METS is expressed using XML, which means that METS data is stored
                                    according to platform and software independent encoding
                                    standards, such as UTF-8 (Unicode), ISO-8859-1, etc. One
                                    important application of METS may be as an implementation of the
                                    Open Archival Information System (OAIS) reference model and as
                                    such can function as a Submission Information Package (SIP) for
                                    use as a transfer syntax; a Dissemination Information Package
                                    (DIP) for display or other applications; and an Archival
                                    Information Package (AIP) for storing and managing information
                                    internally.
                            
                            
                                Background
                                METS had its beginnings as a project that identified metadata and
                                    architecture problems as an area of critical need for digital
                                    libraries. As more and more institutions created digital images
                                    and other files, there was growing concern about sensible
                                    storage for the digital objects (defined as digital files plus
                                    associated metadata). It was the beginning of a serious
                                    discussion, tying together many important aspects of digital
                                    library research. The Making of America 2 (MOA2) project
                                    sponsored by the Digital Library Federation (DLF) in the early
                                    stages and funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities
                                    was the project that resulted from these discussions. New York
                                    Public Library and the libraries of Cornell, Penn State, and
                                    Stanford collaborated under the leadership of the University of
                                    California, Berkeley Library, contributing images and data
                                    towards an investigation of structural and administrative
                                    metadata for digital objects. The MOA2 Document Type Definition
                                    (DTD), which was the direct predecessor of METS, was developed
                                    for the MOA2 project to encapsulate what were then seen as the
                                    required metadata elements.
                                The MOA2 project was completed in early 2000, the Council on
                                    Library and Information Resources (CLIR) published the group's
                                    findings, and the MOA2 DTD was circulated for assessment and
                                    discussion. While MOA2 aroused considerable interest within the
                                    library community, the MOA2 DTD was too restrictive in some
                                    respects and lacked some basic functionality, especially for
                                    time-based media such as audio and video. A meeting was held in
                                    February 2001 for the various parties interested in advancing
                                    the MOA2 DTD to the next stage. Following this meeting, METS was
                                    born.
                            
                            
                                The METS Initiative: Technical Underpinnings
                                The technical component of the METS initiative has completed a
                                    draft schema for the encoding format and made it publicly
                                    available for review. The METS schema tries to support the dual
                                    and sometimes competing requirements of ensuring
                                    interoperability and exchange of documents between different
                                    institutions while also allowing for significant flexibility in
                                    local practice with regards to descriptive and administrative
                                    metadata standards.
                                METS has a very simple structure with just four major components:
                                    descriptive metadata, administrative metadata, file inventory,
                                    and structural map. Only the file inventory and structural map
                                    are required.
                                        The descriptive metadata is optional. A METS object
                                            can contain a Metadata Reference or a Metadata Wrapper.
                                            A Metadata Reference is a link to external descriptive
                                            metadata. A Metadata Wrapper is for descriptive metadata
                                            that is internal to the METS object, as either Base64
                                            encoded binary data or XML. METS does not require a
                                            particular scheme for description, so the implementer
                                            can choose the most appropriate descriptive scheme.
                                        The administrative metadata, also optional, has four
                                            optional subcomponents for technical metadata, rights
                                            metadata, source metadata, and preservation metadata.
                                            Each of these subsections act like the descriptive
                                            section in that the metadata can be encoded ("wrapped")
                                            within the METS document or pointed to in an external
                                            location ("referenced").
                                        The file inventory allows for listing all the files
                                            associated with a digital object. Files can be grouped;
                                            some groupings might include master files, thumbnails,
                                            etc. The files may be pointed to or can be contained
                                            internally as Base64 encoded binary data.
                                        The structural map forms a simple or complex tree
                                            structure that describes the digital object. The
                                            structural map permits the definition of a digital
                                            object that has either parallel or sequential modes and
                                            also allows for the coding of particular regions or
                                            zones of a file as part of the document.
                                    
                            
                            
                                The METS Initiative: Organizational
                                The standard is currently maintained in the Network Development
                                    and MARC Standards Office of the Library of Congress. Having
                                    played a key role in moving this initiative forward and serving
                                    as the work coordinator, the DLF has helped to bring the METS
                                    work to the forefront. RLG has recently taken over as the new
                                    coordinator. This is a natural step for a number of reasons. The
                                    METS standard will be applicable to RLG's member community of
                                    libraries, museums, archives, and historical societies. METS
                                    fits in nicely with much of RLG's ongoing work in digital
                                    preservation. Finally, RLG has always advocated community
                                    standards such as EAD and Z39.50, and METS is viewed as such a
                                    standard. For the next six to eight months, in partnership with
                                    the METS editorial board, RLG will continue the process of
                                    education, information dissemination, and gathering of feedback
                                    on METS. The process of review and evaluation based on use will
                                    continue during this time.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        References
                        
                            
                                
                                    METS homepage:
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    MOA2 homepage:
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    DLF homepage:
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    RLG homepage:
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    OAIS:
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            B.
                                            Hurley
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            J.
                                            Price-Wilkin
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            M.
                                            Proffitt
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            H.
                                            Besser
                                        
                                    
                                    The Making of America II Testbed Project: A
                                        Digital Library Service Model
                                    
                                        
                                        CLIR
                                        1999
                                    
                                
                                Also availalbe at: 
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        METAe and AUTOMATED ENCODING of DIGITIZED TEXTS
                        Birgit Stehno
                        Alexander Egger
                        
                            
                                METAe is a research and development project co-funded by the
                                    European commission (5th Framework, IST Programme, area "Digital
                                    Heritage and Cultural Content") and aims at the development of
                                    an application software for digital archives and libraries. This
                                    software package, the METAe-engine, will automate the structural
                                    encoding of digitized material by introducing layout and
                                    document analysis as basic features. In analogy to OCR engines,
                                    where pure text is generated from image files, the METAe engine
                                    will extract layout and logical elements such as page numbers,
                                    pictures, captions, titles, subtitles, footnotes and document
                                    structures such as prefaces, chapters, subchapters, issues,
                                    contributions, etc. by analyzing the digitized pages of printed
                                    documents. The output of the METAe engine will be an 'archival
                                    information package' (OAIS) - ready for further processing and
                                    integration into digital library applications.
                                This approach should guarantee that a huge amount of work which
                                    up to now has to be done manually will be done automatically. A
                                    central issue related to automated document understanding is the
                                    choice of the mark-up language. As the METAe project aims to
                                    produce a highly flexible output, existing guidelines and
                                    standards have been analyzed with regard to the needs of
                                    automated metadata capturing and encoding. The team decided to
                                    follow the METS working group.
                            
                            
                                Structural mark-up with automated layout analysis and document
                                    understanding
                                In contrast to text encoding performed by humans, automated
                                    capturing of structural metadata, i.e. the automated recognition
                                    of the physical and logical structure, requires not only a
                                    representation model (DTD), but also a recognition model which
                                    supports the automated identification of logical elements such
                                    as titles, chapters, footnotes, etc. (Cfr. Brugger, 1998; Dori
                                    et al., 2000, p. 424f.) As up to now artificial intelligence is
                                    not able to identify logical units by understanding their
                                    textual contents, recognition models have to represent rules and
                                    principles which allow the extraction of logical units on the
                                    basis of their component elements, of their physical (layout)
                                    characteristics and their syntactic relations. Having this
                                    information encoded in a model, the physical structure (physical
                                    blocks and sets of blocks) of a scanned image can be mapped onto
                                    the logical one.
                                The model used in the METAe project has been generated by hand on
                                    the basis of a detailed analysis of monographs and journals and
                                    is represented by 'Augmented Transition Networks' (Woods, 1970),
                                    a formal grammar used normally within the field of natural
                                    language parsing. (Stehno/Retti).
                                Since TEI is conceived as a "common encoding scheme for complex
                                    textual structures" meeting "the varied encoding requirements of
                                    any discipline or application" (Sperberg-McQueen/Burnard, 1999)
                                    our plan was to integrate the TEI encoding scheme in our
                                    recognition model as well as in the presentation model. However,
                                    this approach turned out to be problematic, since TEI - though
                                    it represents an advanced mark-up language - is not designed for
                                    automated document understanding and encoding. TEI offers just a
                                    very inexplicit set of rules for the hierarchical structuring of
                                    the elements.
                                The METAe engine creates an extensive set of descriptive and
                                    administrative metadata on the document and its parts. A lot of
                                    different metadata standards (e.g. MARC, Dublin Core, or DIG35)
                                    will be used depending on the type of metadata and on the kind
                                    of element the metadata is linked to. TEI provides the
                                    possibility of adding metadata, mostly bibliographic metadata,
                                    in the TEI header as well as in the attributes of some of its
                                    elements. For the purpose of METAe the set of elements and
                                    attributes of TEI is not extensive enough. The METAe engine
                                    requires the possibility to add a set of descriptive and
                                    administrative metadata in any metadata format to any of the
                                    elements created by the engine.
                                Moreover TEI never was designed to encode layout characteristics
                                    and physical structure of printed objects in a detailed and
                                    exhaustive way. By the help of the 'rend'-attributes,
                                    typographical information like &lt;head
                                    rend='italics'&gt; can be encoded in some cases, but the
                                    detailed description of pages, page spaces, text blocks and
                                    lines or strings is not possible. Within automated document
                                    analysis and understanding, all this physical information is
                                    available because it is needed for the identification of logical
                                    units. E.g., titles of different levels nearly always are
                                    expressed by different font styles and sizes, margin notes
                                    appear on the outer margin of pages, the font size of epigraphs
                                    is smaller than the default one, etc. Once disposing of this
                                    information, it should be encoded and thus conserved, in order
                                    to allow the recoverability of the original respectively an
                                    electronic representation which presents the source text with
                                    high fidelity.
                                Considering these arguments, we decided to use the METS schema
                                    within the METAe project. The METS schema allows to encode the
                                    bibliographical, administrative and structural metadata
                                    separately providing the possibility to encode the physical as
                                    well as the logical structure within the 'structural maps'. By
                                    this way it is possible to describe the hierarchical layout of
                                    each page, i.e. the decomposition of a page into page spaces
                                    (print space and outer/inner/top/bottom margin), and physical
                                    blocks (text/image/composed blocks). In the METAe project this
                                    information is assembled in an XML file named "ALTO" ('Analysed
                                    layout and text object'). The physical and logical structures
                                    are encoded by linking and grouping layout elements out of the
                                    ALO file using 'div' tags of the structural maps. The physical
                                    structure is linked also to the image files of the pages. Each
                                    physical and logical element can be assigned an arbitrary set of
                                    metadata.
                            
                            
                                METAe: Organizational
                                The METAe project comprises 14 partners from Europe and the US
                                    among them universities, libraries, and software companies. The
                                    METAe engine will be a collaborative product with input from all
                                    partners. The software development is carried out by the German
                                    software company CCS and the University of Florence. The
                                    University of Innsbruck is responsible for the recognition model
                                    and the structural mark-up. A first prototype of the METAe
                                    engine will be available for demonstration purposes in spring
                                    2002.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        References
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            R.
                                            Brugger
                                        
                                    
                                    Eine statistische Methode zur Erkennung von
                                        Dokumentstrukturen
                                
                                
                                    PhD thesis
                                    
                                        University of Fribourg
                                        1998
                                    
                                
                                Also available at:  (visited 05/11/2001)
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            D.
                                            Dori
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            D.
                                            Doermann
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            C.
                                            Shin
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            R.
                                            Haralick
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            I.
                                            Phillips
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            M.
                                            Buchman
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            R.
                                            David
                                        
                                    
                                    The Representation of Document Structure: A
                                        Generic Object- Process Analysis
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            H.
                                            Bunke
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            P.
                                            S.
                                            P.
                                            Wang
                                        
                                    
                                    Handbook of Character Recognition and Document
                                        Analysis
                                    
                                        Singapore
                                        World Scientific Publishing Company
                                        1997, Reprint 2000
                                        421-456
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Library of Congress, Network Development
                                            and MARC Standards Office
                                    
                                    MARC21 Concise Format for Bibliographic Data
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        2001
                                    
                                
                                 (visited 9/11/2001)
                            
                            
                                
                                    METAe Project, University of Innsbruck:
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                    
                                
                                 (visited
                                12/11/2001)
                            
                            
                                
                                    METS. Official homepage at the Library of
                                        Congress:
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                    
                                
                                 (visited
                                    12/11/2001)
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            C.
                                            M.
                                            Sperberg-McQueen
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Lou
                                            Burnard
                                        
                                    
                                    The Association for Literary and Linguistic
                                        Computing (ALLC) Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
                                        Interchange. TEI P3
                                    Revised Reprint, Oxford, May 1999
                                    
                                        Chicago, Oxford
                                        Text Encoding Initiative
                                        1999
                                    
                                
                                
                                    (visited 05/11/2001)
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            B.
                                            Stehno
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            G.
                                            Retti
                                        
                                    
                                    Modelling the logical structure of books and
                                        journals using augmented transition network grammars
                                
                                
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        (submitted)
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            W.
                                            A.
                                            Woods
                                        
                                    
                                    Transition Network Grammars for Natural
                                        Language Analysis
                                
                                
                                    Communications of the ACM
                                    
                                        13
                                        10
                                        591-606
                                        1970
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        METS and FEDORA
                        Thornton Staples
                        
                            The University of Virginia Library has been building digital
                                collections since 1992. We have amassed a large collection that
                                includes a variety of SGML encoded etexts, digital still images,
                                video and audio files, and social science and geographic data sets
                                that are being served to the public from a collection of independent
                                web sites that have very little cross-integration.
                            We began searching in 1998 for a digital library management system
                                that could effectively meet both our current and future digital
                                content needs. Like many other libraries, we initially sought a
                                vertical vendor solution that provided a complete, self-contained
                                package for delivering and managing all digital content needs.
                                Finding nothing available that would meet our needs, we decided to
                                embark on an in-house development effort. Modularity and use of
                                open-system standards is fundamental to our design strategy. Such
                                modularity is essential for future evolution through component
                                replacement. We are convinced that an object-oriented design is most
                                appropriate, allowing us maximum flexibility, scalability and,
                                eventually, interoperability with other repositories. We are also
                                convinced that the Library should be providing tools to our users to
                                give them sophisticated access to our collections and to help them
                                manage their own collections.
                            In the summer of 1999, early in our design process, we discovered a
                                paper about the Flexible Extensible Digital Object Repository
                                Architecture (FEDORA) written by Carl Lagoze and Sandra Payette at
                                Cornell's Digital Library Research Group, describing the
                                architecture that they had designed. FEDORA is a modular
                                architecture built on the principle that interoperability and
                                extensibility is best achieved by the clean separation of data,
                                interfaces, and mechanisms (i.e., executable programs). A FEDORA
                                Repository provides a general-purpose management layer for digital
                                objects. In their simplest form, digital objects are containers that
                                aggregate mime-typed streams of data (e.g., digital images, XML
                                files, metadata), known as datastreams. It should be noted that
                                datastreams can be references to external data - either
                                disseminations of other FEDORA digital objects, or service requests
                                to remote data sources. This capability allows FEDORA digital
                                objects to serve as aggregators and value-added surrogates for
                                existing on-line digital content.
                            In addition to behaving in a generic manner, digital objects must be
                                able to mirror real-world entities by providing access methods that
                                make an object behave in a content-specific manner. For example, a
                                natural behavior for a book would be "Get Table of Contents." FEDORA
                                allows the association of rich and extensible behaviors with digital
                                objects by "plugging in" generic components known as disseminators.
                                Each disseminator aggregates references to: (1) a formally defined
                                behavior interface that defines a set of methods for a particular
                                kind of digital library resource (e.g. a Book interface), (2) an
                                executable mechanism that runs these methods, and (3) the
                                datastreams that the execution mechanism should use to fulfill
                                specific method requests. These interfaces and mechanisms can,
                                themselves, be stored as digital objects, laying the foundation for
                                unlimited extensibility of the architecture.
                            The Digital Library Research and Development group implemented the
                                FEDORA architecture, using an SQL database and a single Java
                                servlet. We implemented a variety of different testbeds, ultimately
                                scale-testing a repository with 10,000,000 objects in it, simulating
                                a very heavy user load, with excellent results. In September of 2001
                                we received a grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation that will
                                enable the University of Virginia Library, in collaboration with
                                Cornell University, to build a sophisticated digital object
                                repository system based on FEDORA that can be the basis for a
                                variety of information management schemes.
                            We will form two teams to carry out this project. First, a
                                development team composed of people from Virginia and Cornell that
                                will pursue a three-phase project with the goal of producing an
                                open-source reference implementation, which will be available to
                                other libraries and practitioners as they construct digital library
                                systems. The first phase involves taking a strong proof of concept
                                (already done) and producing a package that can be distributed and
                                used in a variety of settings. The later phases will extend system
                                by adding important functions that a sophisticated digital library
                                system needs.
                            The second team will deploy the software package at each of their own
                                sites, using it to deliver testbeds of their own digital resources.
                                That group includes: the Digital Library group at Indiana
                                University; the Humanities Computing group at New York University;
                                the Digital Collections and Archives Department at Tufts University;
                                the Humanities Computing group at Kings College, London; the Refugee
                                Studies Center at Oxford University; and the Motion Picture
                                Broadcasting and Recorded Sound Division at the Library of Congress;
                                and a library/academic computing team from Northwestern University.
                            As the development team started to review the Virginia
                                implementation, we discussed the possibility of building the objects
                                as XML files, then using these files to build the necessary indexes
                                in SQL databases. By doing this we are able to build the management
                                interface against the XML, simplifying that effort, while separating
                                the backend of the repository to make it easy to experiment with
                                other indexing schemes. Ultimately, that should make it easy for us
                                to experiment with a full-XML based repository, which we suspect
                                will allow us to scale up to required levels.
                            As we started to redesign the implementation, we looked at the
                                Metadata Encoding and Transmission Standard (METS) schema to see if
                                it would work for describing the objects. It turned out that most of
                                what we needed to describe a FEDORA object was readily available in
                                METS. The only thing really missing was a way to handle the
                                disseminators that FEDORA uses to give the object behaviors. We made
                                a proposal to the METS working group that resulted in a new
                                top-level section being added for behavioral metadata that will be
                                optional. That section can be used to associate an object with a
                                behavior definition object and a corresponding behavior mechanism
                                object. This presentation will discuss the use of METS to build a
                                variety of different types of FEDORA objects, including the two
                                types of behavior objects.
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
