


    
        
            
                 LEMMA3 -- a Primarily Wordform Based Wordclass Tagger
                    and Lemmatizer for Unrestricted German Texts
                
                    
                        Gerd
                        Willée
                        
                            IKP - University of Bonn
                            willee@uni-bonn.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Karlheinz
                        Stöber
                        
                            IKP - University of Bonn
                            kst@ikp.uni-bonn.de
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    The problem of wordclass tagging nowdays gains more and more importancecf. Hans van Halteren, Syntactic Wordclass
                                Tagging, Dordecht / Boston / London 1999. It is
                        required for syntactic analyses in dialog systems, for prosody prediction in
                        speech synthesis and for syntactic annotations of large text corpora. There
                        seems to be a need for systems which can be implemented as modules in other
                        NLP-systems.
                    The system presented here is based on the system LEMMA2e.g. Gerd
                            Willée (1982): Das Programmsystem LEMMA2 - eine Weiterentwicklung von
                            LEMMA. IKP-Arbeitsbericht (Abt. LDV) Nr. 2, Bonn 1982 (als Manuskript
                            veröffentlicht and Gerd Willée (1987): Lemmatisierungsprobleme am Beispiel des Deutschen. Vortrag,
                            gehalten auf dem 35. Kolloquium über die Anwendung der EDV in den
                            Geisteswissenschaften in Tübingen written in PL/1 for the use on
                        main frames. Even if the results and the speed of LEMMA2 were fairly good in
                        those times, because of the meanwhile mostly outdated programming language
                        PL/I we decided to rebuild the system and to redesign it at a large scale.
                    This redesign of the LEMMA2 algorithm resulted in a much faster system, which
                        can be used in speech synthesis systems at nearly real time, with a very
                        efficient deflection-modul using an extendable deflection list, a
                        disambiguation facility for homographs within the closed word classes, and a
                        mostly stringent separation of the data and the algorithms.
                    C++ was chosen as programming language because of its easy portability to
                        many other platforms.
                
                
                    Functionality
                    LEMMA3 is a word class tagger and lemmatizer of unrestricted German text,
                        i.e., to each text word form the (or one possible) word class indication,
                        the base form, and - for the simple tenses of the verbs - the indication of
                        the inflection is added.
                    he program processes text in three steps:
                            Dictionary Lookup: Every text word form is compared with a
                                dictionary containing the -- at this stage still partly homographic
                                - members of the closed word classes
                            Deflection: Word forms belonging to the open, inflected word
                                classes are processed by the modul MORPH
                            Disambiguation: The homographs -- the ones from the closed word
                                classes and the not yet completely resolved inflection indications
                                of verb forms -- are disambiguated by the modul UMGEBUNG
                        
                    LEMMA3 detects the following word classesThe system of word
                            classes used in LEMMA3 corresponds to the classic system, completed by
                            the (quasi-)word class 'Verbzusatz' (under special conditions separable
                            prefixes of German verbs, e.g. 'um-', 'ab-', 'wieder-', cf. 'er kommt
                            wieder' vs. 'wiederkommend').
                            verb
                            verbzusatzsee the endnote above
                            noun
                            adjective
                            adverb
                            pronoun (incl. article)
                            conjunction
                            preposition
                            postposition
                            numeral
                            interjection
                        
                    
                
                
                    Structure
                    The algorithm is mainly word form based, execpt for the module UMGEBUNG,
                        which uses parts of the sentence context in order to disambiguate
                        homographs.
                    The first step after the tokenization is the dictionary look-up.
                    The dictionary used is a full form dictionary containing the elements of the
                        closed word classes. The information assigned to a match consists of the
                        appropriate base form and word class indication, the latter possibly if
                        necessary a homograph class, which will be disambiguated later on.
                    Each dictionary entry has the following structure:keyword -- base
                            form - &lt;word class&gt;
                    Some sample entries from the dictionary:
                        denn denn &lt;aK&gt;
                         in in &lt;PP&gt;
                        seitlich seitlich &lt;p9&gt;
                        zu zu &lt;PX&gt;
                        zugute zugute &lt;VZ&gt;
                    
                    The homograph class 'aK' (homograph between a conjunction and an adverb) is
                        assigned to 'denn' and is to be disambiguated in UMGEBUNG.
                    The wordclass 'PP' (preposition) is assigned to 'in'.
                    The homograph class 'p8' (homograph between an adverb and a preposition) is
                        assigned to 'seitlich' and is to be disambiguated in UMGEBUNG.
                    The homograph class 'PX' (homograph between a verbzusatz and a preposition)
                        is assigned to 'zu' and is to be disambiguated in UMGEBUNG.
                    The wordclass 'VZ' (verbzusatz) is assigned to 'zugute'.
                    The deflection for verbs, adjectives, and nouns is made by the modul MORPH,
                        i.e. it determines the word class and generates the proper base form to a
                        given word form. This is done by the aid of the deflection list, which
                        contains word stems or parts of them together with the allowed endings for a
                        given base form and its word class. The latter information can be taken
                        only, if the tested word form ends in a valid combination of stem and
                        ending. For verb forms the (at this point often still provisional)
                        inflection codes are supplied as well.
                    The entries for nouns can be searched only, if a word form has an initial
                        capital. The distinction between adjectives and verbs (e.g. 'lieb' vs.
                        'lieben') can only be done, if the endings are different; otherwose this
                        distinction has to be done by the modul UMGEBUNG.
                    The structure of the deflection list is as follows:
                        keystring (stem)
                        -- word class -- base form -- list of endings ('$' means 'no
                        ending'), the endings for verb forms include numeric codes for the
                        inflection charcteristics.
                    Some sample entries from the morphlis-dataset:
                        em su em en, e, s, $,
                        einzig ad einzig e, em, en, es, er, $,
                        geh v gehen e,1 $,11 st,3 est,12 (...)
                        lieb ad lieb (...) es, er, em, $,
                        lieb v lieben (...) tet,20 st,3 t,5 (...)
                        liebe su liebe $,
                    
                    If the final string of the courrent word form matches a list entry
                        concatenated with one of the allowed endings given, then the word class is
                        taken from the entry (in case of nouns after a successful check of an
                        initial capital of the word form), the base form of the current word is
                        formed by subsituting the matching string by the given base form, in case of
                        verbs the appropriate inflection codes are evaluated.
                    
                        word form in question: 'Systems'
                        
                        word class added: 'su' (noun)
                        
                        generated base form: 'System'
                        
                        word form in question: 'einziger'
                        
                        word class added: 'ad' (adjective)
                        
                        generated base form: 'einzig'
                        
                        word form in question: 'vergehst'
                        
                        word class added: 'v' (verb)
                        
                        generated base form: 'vergehen'
                        
                        indication of inflection: 'G2' (see list below)
                        
                        word form in question: 'liebem'
                        
                        word class added: 'ad'
                        
                        generated base form: 'lieb'
                        
                        word form in question: 'verliebtet'
                        
                         word class added: 'v'
                        
                        generated base form: 'verlieben'
                        
                        indication of inflection: 'V5' (see list below)
                        
                    
                    
                        word form in question: 'Liebe'
                        
                        word class added: 'su'
                        
                        generated base form: 'Liebe'
                    
                    Explanation of some inflection codes for verbs:
                        1 G0#: provisinal, homograph between 1.sg.pres.ind.act.
                            and 3.sg.pres.conj.act.
                        
                        3 G2: 2.sg.pres.ind.act.
                        
                        11 IS: imp.sg.
                        
                        12 K2: 2.sg.conj.[I+II]act.
                        
                        20 V5: 2.pl.pret.ind.act.
                    
                    The modul UMGEBUNG is the final component of LEMMA3 operating on whole
                        sentences.
                    In a first step all word class assignements not yet done by the modul MORPH
                        are added by rules, according to the word classes already determined for the
                        surrounding word forms. E.g., if an undetermined word form ending in '-e'
                        has a pronoun as predecessor and is followed by a noun, then the word class
                        is 'adjective', the base form is generated by reducing the final '-e' from
                        the word form. if the predecessor is the word 'ich', then the word class is
                        verb, the base form is generated by adding a final '-n' and the inflection
                        is determined as 1.sg.pres.ind.act.
                    As example for the disambiguation of the homographs found in the dictionary
                        follows the rule for the homograph class 'p9'(cf. the example form the
                            dictionary):
                            'If the word following the word form in question is a pronoun, an
                                article or a preposition, then it is a preposition; else it is an
                                adverb.'
                        
                    The not yet completely resolved indications of the verbal inflection forms
                        are disambiguated by context rules, which use the fact, that the 1. and 2.
                        person of verbforms always must be accompanied by the corresponding personal
                        pronoun. e.g.:
                            The provisional indicator 'G0^#' stands for present stems ending
                                in '-e'. If an 'ich' is found in a defined tontext of the verb,
                                1.sg.pres.ind.act. is assumed, otherwise 3.sg.pres.conj.act.
                        
                
                
                    Limitations
                    The focus for the new conception of LEMMA3 had been laid on a clear
                        manageable algorithm, the analysis data of which easily can be extended,
                        more than on a system as linguistically sophisticated as possible. This is
                        reflected in the choice of the word classes and in the algorithm in general.
                    Some incorrect word class tages are produced systematically:
                    Word forms with an initial capital, which are not nouns, (at the beginning of
                        a sentence), but which resemble nouns, are treated as nouns.
                    Without further semantic and contextual information it is not possible to
                        distinguish between word forms like 'tränke' (conjunctive II form from the
                        verb 'trinken') and 'tränke' (present tense form from the verb 'tränken') on
                        the base of the pure word form given. In these cases one definite choice had
                        to be made in favour of the (probabely) more frequent occurrence.
                    Word sequences like 'hin- und hergehen' cannot be processed correctly by
                        LEMMA3.
                    Forms of the compound tenses (like 'ich werde gehen') can be analysed only as
                        seperated parts ('werde' and 'gehen').
                    The default rule for word forms with no other classification normally
                        determines the word class 'noun', which sometimes may be wrong, especially
                        if the word form has no initial capital.
                
                
                    Evaluation
                    The evaluation still is in progress. First estimates on a medium sized test
                        set show that - as for the word classes - LEMMA3 tags more than 95%
                        correctly.
                    A more detailed evaluation will be presented at the conference.
                
                
                    Intended Use of LEMMA3
                    There has been a need for a fast word class tagger for speech synthesis
                        purposes as well as for corpus linguistics. The first implementation of
                        LEMMA3 as a modul will be in the BOSS-Systemsee among others:
                            Stöber, K., (2001), "Bestimmung und Auswahl von Zeitbereichseinheiten
                            für die konkatenative Sprachsynthese", Doctoral Thesis, University of
                            Bonn, Germany (Bonn Open Synthesis System)Klabbers
                            E.A.M., Stöber K., Veldhuis R., Wagner P., Breuer S., (2001), "Speech
                            synthesis development made easy: The Bonn Open Synthesis System", In:
                                Proc. Eurospeech'2001, Aalborg, Denmark,
                            Vol. 1, pp. 521-524 , for which purpose real time processing is
                        needed, and in RETIVOXRETIVOX is being developed by Dr. B.
                            Schröder and Dr. Th. Portele, IKP, University of Bonn (e-mail:
                            B.Schroeder@uni-bonn.de)., a text-to-speech application, which
                        provides an interface between telephone and e-mail or www; moreover it will
                        be used stand-alone in corpuslinguistical research and teaching at the IKP.
                    It will be freely available for scientific purposes.
                
            
        
    
