


    
        
            
                Crunching numbers in the 'Night Watches of
                    Bonaventura': A computer-aided contribution to author's lexicography
                
                    
                        Barbara
                        Arnold
                        
                            University of Exeter
                            b.arnold@exeter.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Analysing the language of a literary text is a complex undertaking. In order
                        to obtain a complete survey of the literary idiolect of a particular writer,
                        as defined by his use of individual word and syntactic style, author
                        dictionaries have proved to be a reliable and informative source of data.
                        Such data, in the form of a corpus, lends itself to analytical
                        interpretation by providing a basis for literary and linguistic exegesis.
                        This presentation will introduce a project, namely the construction of a
                        dictionary based on a German novel of the early 19th century, 'Nachtwachen von Bonaventura' (Night
                            Watches of Bonaventura'). Various aspects of computer-based
                        research in author lexicography will be discussed, focussing on statistical
                        methods that can be used as a basis for extracting characteristic features
                        of style and lexis.
                
                
                    1. Preliminary notes
                    The creation of a dictionary based on the 'Night Watches of
                            Bonaventura' presented itself as a rewarding and challenging
                        task for a number of reasons. Firstly, it would make a contribution to the
                        rather neglected area of author lexicography in general (Mattausch 1990,
                        1558). Secondly, because a dictionary of this particular text has not
                        previously been compiled, although the novel is widely considered to be a
                        valuable source for literary, linguistic and computational research. A
                        dictionary of the 'Night Watches' appeared able to
                        serve all of these purposes simultaneously. Being a systematically ordered
                        collection of language material and with its XML-encoded structure, the
                        lexicon is intended to be a prototype example of the capabilities of
                        text-based computing in the humanities, offering easy access to semantic
                        definitions as well as to a set of sense relations.
                    Following decades of speculation concerning authorship of the novel, which
                        was published under the pseudonym 'Bonaventura' in 1804, it can now be taken
                        as certain that August Klingemann, who had formerly been regarded as a
                        rather marginal figure in German Romanticism, indeed wrote the 'Night Watches'. The techniques employed to unlock the
                        puzzle of who wrote as 'Bonaventura' ranged from frequency counts (Fleig
                        1985) to sophisticated computer-aided approaches (Wickmann 1974).
                        Irrefutable evidence of Klingemann's authorship emerged when an autograph
                        originating from him was found in 1987, citing the 'Night
                            Watches' among his other works (Haag 1987). Knowing who
                        'Bonaventura' really was marked the beginning of a new epoch in research on
                        the novel. Now it is the text itself that attracts scholars, as one of the
                        most recent publications indicates (Kaminski 2001).
                
                
                    2. Crunching numbers in the ‘Night Watches of
                            Bonaventura’
                    Compiling a dictionary and processing items of vocabulary lexicographically
                        both require one simple question to be resolved at the very outset: "What is
                        a word?" Defining the term 'word' as a primitive carrier of meaning that
                        exists independently of the syntactical structure (Duden-Grammatik 1998,
                        870), is certainly an attractive assumption, but it provides no help in
                        carried out computer-aided text analysis for a language like German, which
                        is extraordinarily rich in displaying phenomena such as separable prefixes
                        that appear as "words" in the data file but are not independent of other
                        elements of the sentence.
                    Neither is it clear whether abbreviations, numbers or symbols such as Greek
                        letters, which are employed quite frequently throughout the novel, ought to
                        be treated as other lemmata or extracted from the word list and presented in
                        an appendix. Equally troublesome is the problem of proper names. One wonders
                        whether proper names are proper words at all or whether their status within
                        the system of language is somewhat different as they refer to individuals
                        rather than general ideas (Lerner/Zimmermann 1991, 349).
                    Reviewing the statistical aspects of the corpus material leads to some
                        fascinating conclusions about the essential ingredients of a literary text.
                        "Crunching numbers" in Bonaventura's 16 'Night
                            Watches', the 16 chapters in which the novel is organized, works
                        on several levels. Counting all the separate "word" units within each
                        sentence produces a total of 38,785 tokens to be identified by a
                        word-processing programme. Using Tustep to generate a Kwic-Index of these
                        parts of speech produces a list of 8,522 types. This number shrinks again
                        after having reduced the inflected word forms to their canonical form. This
                        means that we can reduce the 'Night Watches' to a
                        list of 5739 lemmata in terms of our dictionary.
                    Not all words appear with equal frequency in the novel. Not surprisingly are
                        there more contextual occurrences of articles, conjunctions and auxiliary
                        verbs than of nouns and other mere grammatical words. With a total number of
                        6,692 occurrences for all the nouns they only form 17.25% of the whole
                        novel, while this number is easily topped just by counting all the
                        occurrences for the definite articles der, die,
                            das (3,576 occurrences), the conjunction und (1,689 occurrences) and the pronouns er, sie, es(1,575 occurrences).
                    Although these functional words clearly dominate the text, their semantic
                        meaning remains mainly on the surface. Focussing on the most frequent nouns
                        on the other hand is much more rewarding in terms of meaning and
                        interpretational value. A survey such as that given in figure 1 produces a
                        puzzling effect: Mensch ('human being'; 83
                        occurrences), Teufel ('devil'; 56 occurrences), Nacht ('night'; 53 occurrences), Kopf ('head'; 51 occurrences), Hand
                        ('hand'; 50 occurrences), Zeit ('time'; 50
                        occurrences), Gott ('god'; 49 occurrences),
                            Himmel ('heaven/sky'; 49 occurrences), Liebe ('love'; 47 occurrences) and Tod ('death'; 43 occurrences) are only ten
                        different types, but they seem to be enough to express the content of the
                            'Night Watches', disregarding the rest of the
                        novel.
                    
                        Figure 1: frequency count of nouns 
                    
                    Another surprising figure is the percentage of those words that appear only
                        once in the whole of the text: 54.8% of all lemmata are employed only once
                        throughout the novel, leaving 3,146 entries in the dictionary with single
                        occurrences.
                    Some words show a significantly high number of occurrences concentrated in
                        certain 'Night Watches' only. The verb lieben ('to love') for instance occurs 30 times
                        throughout the whole of the novel, with an average number of zero to four
                        occurrences per chapter. Although the semantics of 'love' are implicitly
                        dealt with in almost each 'Night Watch', there is
                        only one statistical peak in chapter XIV with 12 references close together.
                        The antonymic hassen ('to hate') on the other
                        hand appears only 12 times showing no significant peak at all (figure
                        2).
                    Retrieving this sort of information might most conveniently be supported by a
                        computational programme, e.g. Tom Horton's WordCluster ( ) as the method applied so far, despite using Tustep, still requires
                        several repetitive procedural actions and quite a considerable amount of
                        tedious manual interferences.
                    
                        figure 2: distributional relations of 'lieben / Liebe - hassen / Hass
                            '
                    
                    Expressing lexical material in terms of such precise statistics contributes
                        to a deeper understanding of what poetic texts consist of. For the 'Night Watches' surveys like these become even more
                        relevant, especially as doubts are still expressed as to the work's
                        authorship. Assuming that Klingemann was involved in authorship, one recent
                        publication nevertheless suggests that some parts might originate from
                        another writer, Clemens Brentano (Braeuer-Ewers 1995, 13).
                        Computer-generated comparative studies of a variety of narrative prose
                        showing distributional relations like the above may certainly help to
                        develop a further insight into the concept of an 'idiolectal fingerprint'
                        (Cluett 1976).
                
                
                    3. Outlook
                    Analysing frequency counts and distributional relations are certainly not the
                        only way in which a dictionary of Klingemann's 'Night
                            Watches of Bonaventura' can be used in a linguistic context. As
                        an illustrative article (figure 3) indicates, the dictionary can be used for
                        different purposes.
                    
                        figure 3: example of a dictionary article
                    
                    Besides lemma, word class, frequency, definition and contextual reference
                        there is a sophisticated system of cross-references at the bottom of each
                        entry. Here hints on word-formation are given and sense-related pointers
                        create a network structure of meanings. Each article is generated by
                        consulting a number of lexicographical reference works. Comparing the
                        semantic commentaries of dictionaries published during the 18th and 19th
                        century (Adelung 1793-1801; Campe 1807-11; Grimm 1854-1961) with a reliable
                        reference work of contemporary German (Duden 1999) leads to insights into
                        the history of words, including aspects of lexicalisation and changes in
                        meaning and usage.
                    The dictionary on the ‘Night Watches of Bonaventura’
                        is just one part of a larger project dealing with August Klingemann. As
                        mentioned above linguistic research has to a great extent concentrated on
                        isolating typical idiolectal ways of expression within the novel for the
                        purpose of proving authorship. Now that we know its author it makes sense to
                        compare the vocabulary employed in the ‘Night
                            Watches’ to that of other items of written work left by
                        Klingemann. The application of IT facilities may provide interesting
                        insights into these, too, pointing the way to further potential of
                        computer-aided research in the field of author lexicography.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Johann
                                    Christoph
                                    Adelung
                                
                            
                            Grammatisch-kritisches Wörterbuch der hochdeutschen
                                Mundart
                            2nd edn
                            
                                5 vols
                                Leipzeig
                                Breitkopf und Härtel
                                1793-1801
                            
                        
                        repr. Hildesheim / New York: Georg Olms, 1970
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ina
                                    Braeuer-Ewers
                                
                            
                            Züge des Grotesken in den 'Nachtwachen von
                                Bonaventura'
                            
                                Paderborn
                                Schöningh
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Joachim
                                    Heinrich
                                    Campe
                                
                            
                            Wörterbuch der Deutschen Sprache
                            
                                5 vols
                                Braunschweig
                                Schulbuchhandlung
                                1807-11
                            
                        
                        repr. Hildesheim / New York: Georg Olms, 1969
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Robert
                                    Cluett
                                
                            
                            Prose Style and Critical Reading
                            
                                New York
                                Teachers College Press
                                1976
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Duden
                            
                            Das große Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache
                            
                                Dudenredaktion
                            
                            3rd edn
                            
                                10 vols
                                Mannheim / Leipzig / Wien
                                Bibliographisches Institut
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Duden
                            
                            Grammatik der deutschen Gegenwartssprache
                            
                                Dudenredaktion
                            
                            6th edn
                            
                                Mannheim / Leipzig / Wien
                                Bibliographisches Institut
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Horst
                                    Fleig
                                
                            
                            Literarischer Vampirismus. Klingemanns 'Nachtwachen von
                                Bonaventura'
                            
                                Tübingen
                                Niemeyer
                                1985
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jacob
                                    Grimm
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Wilhelm
                                    Grimm
                                
                            
                            Deutsches Wörterbuch
                            
                                32 vols
                                Leipzig
                                Hirzel
                                1854-1961
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ruth
                                    Haag
                                
                            
                            Noch einmal: Der Verfasser der Nachtwachen von
                                Bonaventura
                        
                        
                            Euphorion
                            
                                81
                                
                                286-297
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Nicola
                                    Kaminski
                                
                            
                            Kreuz-Gänge. Romanexperimente der deutschen
                                Romantik
                            
                                Paderborn
                                Schöningh
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    August
                                    Klingemann
                                
                            
                            Nachtwachen von Bonaventura
                            
                                Penig
                                Dienemann
                                1804
                            
                        
                        repr. Frankfurt / Main: Insel Verlag, 1974
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jean-Yves
                                    Lerner
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    E.
                                    Zimmermann
                                
                            
                            Eigennamen
                        
                        
                            Semantik. Ein internationales Handbuch der
                                zeitgenössischen Forschung
                            
                                
                                    Arnim
                                    von Stechow
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Dieter
                                    Wunderlich
                                
                            
                            
                                Berlin
                                Walter de Gruyter
                                1991
                                349-370
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Josef
                                    Mattausch
                                
                            
                            Das Autoren-Bedeutungswörterbuch
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Franz
                                    Josef
                                    Hausmann
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Oskar
                                    Reichmann
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Herbert
                                    Ernst
                                    Wiegand
                                
                            
                            Wörterbücher. Ein internationales Handbuch zur
                                Lexikographie
                            
                                vol 2
                                Berlin
                                Walter de Gruyter
                                1990
                                1549-1562
                            
                        
                    

                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Dieter,
                                    Wickmann
                                
                            
                            Zum Bonaventura-Problem: Eine mathematisch-statistische
                                Überprüfung der Klingemann-Hypothese
                        
                        
                            Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und
                                Linguistik
                            
                                4
                                
                                13-29
                                1974
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
