


    
        
            
                 Mots15 - An interactive concordance system (built from
                    mostly off-the- shelf parts)
                
                    
                        Paul
                        Meurer
                        
                            University of Bergen
                            paul.meurer@hit.uib.no
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Michael
                        Sperberg-McQueen
                        
                            World Wide Web Consortium
                            cmsmcq@acm.org
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Mots 15 is an interactive Web-based concordance or full-text retrieval system
                        built mostly out of off-the-shelf software.
                    The goals of the Mots-15 project are:
                            to build a reasonably capable full-text retrieval system, with
                                functionality generally similar to Tact, ARRAS, and the like, but
                                with better markup awareness
                            to keep minimum investment low for both implementors and users
                            to allow experimentation with interesting parts of the query
                                system
                        
                    From these design goals follow several design principles:
                            simplicity of implementation
                            use of off-the-shelf components wherever possible
                            modularity, loose coupling among modules using predefined
                                interfaces wherever possible
                        
                
                
                    1. Basic interfaces in a query system
                    
                        1.1. Monoliths
                        At a very simple level, an interactive query system simply accepts
                            queries from a user, which return responses from the data. In systems
                            like Arras and Tact, the single monolithic software package controls
                            everything in the diagram.
                        
                            Image 1: A monolithic query system 
                        
                    
                    
                        1.2. Web interface
                        With the advent of graphical browsers for the World Wide Web, however, it
                            is possible to provide a fairly attractive interface at a much lower
                            cost than would otherwise be possible. It may still make sense to devise
                            special-purpose user interface software for specific purposes, but we
                            can go a long way without it, just relying on the users to have chosen a
                            Web browser they like reasonably well. The Web, that is, exposes an
                            interface between the user interface and the data in the back end.
                        
                            Image 2: A Web-based query system
                        
                        This interface sets certain limits to our freedom — we must now use HTML
                            to describe what the user sees (we can use arbitrary XML if we are
                            willing to require that the user have an XML-capable browser) and the
                            user's interactions with the server are limited to what can be done
                            using HTML forms (and possibly a browser scripting language like
                            Javascript) — but within those limits we can develop better user
                            interfaces at a lower cost than if we were building from scratch.
                        Even more important, we can now swap front- and back-ends in and out. We
                            can experiment with different user interfaces by writing different
                            front-end forms and HTML style sheets. In theory, we can also experiment
                            with different back ends by substituting one for the other and using the
                            same front end; in practice, the existing systems built on this model
                            don't easily allow for swapping different back ends in and out, because
                            the interface between the front end and the back end varies with the
                            specific product used as the back end. Because different commercial
                            products rarely support identical interfaces, this means it's rarely
                            possible to swap a new back end in with minimal effort.
                    
                    
                        1.3. Mots 15
                        The Mots 15 system differs from the generic Web-based system primarily by
                            exposing a generic query interface in front of the back-end-specific
                            query interface, in order to buffer the front end and back end from each
                            other.
                        
                            Image 3: Basic plan of MOTS query system 
                        
                        Ideally, this generic query interface should follow some open
                            specification; ideally, it should provide all the functionality we want
                            (to keep life simple), and no more (so that it is easy to build back
                            ends if we want to do it ourselves); the exact choice depends on the
                            tradeoff between these incompatible goals.
                        Assuming that we have some suitable query language, and a way to
                            translate from it into the query language of the back end, then any XML
                            query engine may be used as back end.
                        A SQL dbms may be the most flexible back end. The design made by MSM for
                            this would involve a few light-weight scripts which run on top of’ the
                            SQL database system. The SQL system itself would in this design produce
                            not elements but element pointers, which would be used to extract the
                            elements from a saved copy of the XML file.
                        The task of translating from the open query language to the proprietary
                            back end query language is, of course, simplified if the back end
                            accepts the open query language itself.
                        Another alternative would be using the corpus management system Corpus
                            WorkBench (IMS, Stuttgart) as the MOTS back end, possibly combined with
                            an XML query facility. This would allow for more advanced linguistic
                            queries.
                    
                
                
                    2. Pieces of Mots 15
                    Mots 15 is designed to make it relatively simple to specify and implement
                        each piece of the system. The better we succeed in this goal, the easier it
                        will be for us to experiment with different parts of the system, and the
                        easier it will be for eventual users to customize it for their own purposes.
                        Eventually, the designers hope that Mots 15 will grow into a library of
                        reusable and customizable pieces, which individuals and small projects can
                        modify to make useful special-purpose systems.
                    The Mots 15 design requires the following pieces of software:
                            browser: an off-the-shelf Web browser; this handles the actual
                                display of results on the user's screen and interaction with the
                                user
                            forms: one or more HTML forms which allow the user to specify
                                searches; these produce an HTML-forms data stream which the parser
                                hands to an appropriate CGI script
                            form-to-query translator: a program to translate the forms data
                                into a query, expressed in the open query language
                            query-to-query translator: a program to translate the query from
                                the open query language into the query language supported by the
                                back end
                            back end: a program, which accepts queries in some (possibly
                                proprietary) query language and returns as results e.g. some set of
                                XML elements
                            wrapper: a program which takes the results and places them in
                                two-level wrapper: (a) an outermost mots:result XML element and (b)
                                an element depending on the hit type wrapped around each hit, each
                                with attributes providing useful information about the query and its
                                results
                            XML-to-HTML translator: a program which takes the wrapped results
                                and translates them into HTML suitable for display in the user's
                                off-the-shelf browser
                            transaction manager: a CGI script to manage the query/response
                                transaction, by calling (or incorporating) the various other
                                programs in this list; it may also be responsible for session
                                management
                        
                    
                
                
                    3. Open problems and opportunities
                    The existing implementation of Mots15 (as of November 2001) is a minimal
                        system with
                            a choice of several simple Web interfaces
                            support for straightforward XML documents only
                            XSLT stylesheets for XML-HTML translation
                            a limited (XPath based) query language, extended with word
                                frequency queries
                        
                    There are several obvious challenges for the future development of Mots
                            15:
                            serious Web interface (room for experiment)
                            ‘XML++’ support 
                            display of parallel versions, textual variation 
                            external and user supplied annotation 
                            proximity searching
                            exploiting grammatical annotation of text
                            supporting documents with overlap (i.e. TexMECS)
                            allowing users to search as if the text were marked up more simply
                                than it is (e.g. with a uniform chapter/section/paragraph/sentence
                                hierarchy)
                            supporting more powerful back ends (either by means of wormholes
                                in the open query language, or by means of a second interface)
                            managing selection of texts from a corpus or collection; federated
                                searches
                        
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            John
                                Price-Wilkin
                            Using the World-Wide Web to Deliver Complex Electronic Documents: Implications for Libraries
                        
                        
                            Public-Access Computer Systems Review
                            
                                5
                                3
                                5-21
                                1994
                            
                        .
                    
                    
                        
                            John
                               Price-Wilkin
                            A Gateway between the World Wide Web and PAT: Exploring SGML Through the Web
                        
                        
                            Public-Acces Computer Systems Review
                            
                                5
                                7
                                527
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            John
                                Price-Wilkin
                            The Feasibility of Wide-area Textual Analysis Systems in Libraries: A Practical Analysis
                        
                        
                            Presented at Literary Texts in an Electronic Age: Scholarly Implications and Library Services, the 31st Annual Clinic on Library Applications of Data Processing (University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign). April 10-12, 1994
                            
                                
                                
                                1994
                            
                        . Published in the Proceedings of the Clinic. Gateway between the World Wide Web and PAT: Exploring SGML Through the Web.
                    
                        
                            John
                              Price-Wilkin
                            Just-in-time Conversion, Just-in-case Collections: Effectively leveraging rich document formats for the WWW
                        
                        
                            D-Lib Magazine
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                May 1997
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
