


    
        
            
                New Directions in Statistical Stylistics and Authorship
                    Attribution
                
                    
                        David
                        Hoover
                        
                            New York University
                            david.hoover@nyu.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                This presentation will describe an investigation that compares the relative
                    effectiveness and accuracy of multivariate analysis (cluster analysis) of the
                    frequencies of very frequent words and the frequencies of very frequent word
                    sequences in correctly attributing texts to authors. Cluster analyses based on
                    the most frequent words are fairly accurate for corpora of texts by known
                    authors, whether the texts are 30,000- or 10,000-word sections of modern British
                    and American novels, or 4,000-word sections of contemporary literary critical
                    texts. They are, however, only rarely completely accurate; furthermore, when
                    small groups of problematic texts taken from the corpora are used in simulated
                    authorship studies, analyses based on frequent words rather consistently fail to
                    cluster them correctly. But when frequent word sequences are used rather than
                    frequent words or in addition to them, the analyses often improve in accuracy,
                    sometimes quite significantly, suggesting that analyses based on frequent word
                    sequences constitute improved tools for authorship attribution and statistical
                    stylistic studies.
                One of the most popular places to search for a "wordprint" that can characterize
                    the style of an author has been among the frequencies of the most frequent words
                    of the language. In his seminal work on Jane Austen (1987), John F. Burrows
                    demonstrated fairly convincingly that the frequencies of extremely frequent
                    words like the, and, of, a, and to, can often be used to distinguish different
                    authors, novels, and even different characters within a single novel. In spite
                    of their intuitively insignificant nature, such words can even have interesting
                    and potentially significant stylistic effects. This seems surprising when we
                    remember that the five words above normally constitute roughly 20% of the word
                    tokens in a novel. Yet their high frequency and the extreme unlikelihood that
                    authors can or even wish to consciously control them suggests habitual or
                    routinized use that may reflect an author's style across all his or her texts,
                    in spite of differing subjects, themes, and points of view. Because of this, and
                    because their frequencies often vary significantly among different authors,
                    texts, and characters, in spite of their uniformly high frequencies (see
                    Burrows, 1987: 3-4), frequent words have been popular targets for various kinds
                    of multivariate analysis (see also, Burrows and Hassall, 1988, and Burrows,
                    1992).
                Much recent work with multivariate analysis of the frequencies of frequent words
                    has produced interesting and significant results, especially in the field of
                    authorship attribution (see Holmes, 1992, Holmes and Forsyth, 1995; Tweedie,
                    Holmes, and Corns, 1998). As I have shown in a recent study (Hoover, 2001),
                    however, cluster analysis of the frequencies of the most frequent words is very
                    often not completely accurate in attributing texts to their authors when
                    performed on a corpus of texts by known authors.
                As interesting as authorship attribution is, multivariate analysis is, I would
                    argue, of potentially more interest in statistical stylistics and corpus
                    stylistics. If techniques can be found that can accurately distinguish authors
                    from each other, those techniques should be able to tell us something
                    significant about the styles of those authors. To further the search for more
                    accurate analytic methods, I have been evaluating cluster analyses based on
                    frequent word sequences (defined simply as groups of contiguous words) rather
                    than or combined with frequent words. (The idea for this project came out of a
                    discussion with Gary Shawver of the Humanities Computing group at New York
                    University about the possibility of looking at frequent collocations.) One
                    reason that sequences are attractive is that the order of words within them
                    provides information that cannot be retrieved from the frequencies of the
                    constitutive elements alone.
                My investigation has shown that analyses involving frequent word sequences are
                    often superior to analyses of the frequencies of frequent words in attributing
                    known texts to known author. Some analyses using frequent sequences produce
                    results that are completely accurate where frequent words alone fail, and some
                    analyses using combinations of frequent sequences and frequent words are more
                    effective than either by themselves, again sometimes producing completely
                    accurate attributions in relatively intractable cases.
                I begin with an initial corpus of twenty-nine 30,000-word sections of Modern
                    British and American novels by fourteen authors. I go on to analyze a subset of
                    this corpus, consisting of twenty of novels by eight authors, limit the analysis
                    still further to a corpus consisting of the sixteen third-person novels
                    extracted from among the twenty novels, and then to the pure narrative of the
                    same sixteen novels. I turn next to a very different kind of corpus, analyzing
                    twenty-five contemporary articles of literary criticism, to test whether
                    frequent collocations produce improved results for other genres. Finally,
                    extracting the texts of two problematic authors from the sixteen pure narratives
                    and two more from among the literary criticism analysis, I test the
                    effectiveness of the analysis of frequent sequences under circumstances that
                    more closely resemble traditional authorship problems.
                Although analyses based on frequent sequences or combinations of frequent
                    sequences and frequent words are not universally more effective than those based
                    on frequent words alone, and still fail to achieve completely correct results in
                    some cases, they do seem promising as an additional tool in authorship
                    attribution, and, potentially, in stylistic studies as well. Figures 1 and 2
                    show the improvement in two analyses when frequent sequences are used instead
                    of, or in combination with, frequent words. Figure 3 shows that, in some cases,
                    frequent sequences give correct results, even when frequent words uniformly
                    fail.
                
                
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    F.
                                    Burrows
                                
                            
                            Computation into Criticism
                            
                                Oxford
                                Clarendon Press
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    F.
                                    Burrows
                                
                            
                            Computers and the Study of Literature
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christopher
                                    S.
                                    Butler
                                
                            
                            Computers and Written Texts
                            
                                Oxford
                                Blackwell
                                1992
                                167-204
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    F.
                                    Burrows
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    J.
                                    Hassall
                                
                            
                            Anna Boleyn and the Authenticity of Fielding's Feminine
                                Narratives
                        
                        
                            Eighteenth Century Studies
                            
                                21
                                4
                                427-453
                                1988
                             
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christopher
                                    S.
                                    Butler
                                
                            
                            Computers and Written Texts
                            
                                Oxford
                                Blackwell
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    I.
                                    Holmes
                                
                            
                            A Stylometric Analysis of Mormon Scripture and Related
                                Texts
                        
                        
                            Journal of the Royal Statistical Society (A)
                            
                                155
                                1
                                91-120
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    I.
                                    Holmes
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    S.
                                    Forsyth
                                
                            
                            The Federalist Revisited: New Directions in Authorship
                                Attribution
                        
                        
                            Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                            
                                10
                                2
                                111-127
                                `995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    L.
                                    Hoover
                                
                            
                            Making Use of Statistical Measures of Style
                        
                        
                            MLA Convention, San Francisco, December 28, 1998
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    L.
                                    Hoover
                                
                            
                            Language and Style in The Inheritors
                            
                                Lanham, MD
                                University Press of America
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    L.
                                    Hoover
                                
                            
                            Statistical Stylistics and Authorship Attribution: an
                                Empirical Investigation
                        
                        
                            Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                            
                                16
                                4
                                421-44
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    F.
                                    J.
                                    Tweedie
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    I.
                                    Holmes
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    N.
                                    Corns
                                
                            
                            The Provenance of De Doctrina Christiana, Attributed to
                                John Milton: A Statistical Investigation
                        
                        
                            Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                            
                                13
                                2
                                77-87
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
