


    
        
            
                Just-in-Time-Teaching in the Humanities: Lessons
                    Learned from the Web Cahier
                
                    
                        Mark
                        Wolff
                        
                            Hartwick College
                            wolffmO@hartwick.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The advent of the Internet has introduced a number of communication technologies
                    to higher education that have had a significant impact on the ways students and
                    teachers interact. By now most students use email to communicate with their
                    professors on a regular basis, and it is common for professors to use online
                    discussion boards and chat software to reach out to their students beyond the
                    classroom. Even though these technologies create more opportunities for contact
                    between students and instructors, they tend to promote uneven interaction
                    outside the classroom: some students will take advantage of the media, often
                    dominating the discussion, while other students will feel reluctant to
                    participate or will allow other students to carry the discussion. Many
                    educational software companies such as Blackboard offer integrated packages with
                    assessment tools for class surveys and online tests. As someone who has
                    experimented with these tools in my courses in language, literature, and
                    culture, I have searched for a way to interact individually with each student,
                    addressing his or her particular strengths and weaknesses with content while at
                    the same time assessing the entire class to identify those areas where they
                    understand the material and where more guidance on my part is required. The
                    dissatisfaction with existing courseware prompted me to write my own web-based
                    program, the Web Cahier. In this paper I will explain the pedagogical philosophy
                    of the Web Cahier and report on student feedback during the first year of its
                    implementation at Hartwick College. (I will explain the design of the Web Cahier
                    and make it available to other scholars as open source software in a separate
                    poster session.)
                The pedagogy which informs the design of the Web Cahier is inspired by
                    Just-in-Time-Teaching, or JiTT, a teaching strategy developed by Gregor M. Novak
                    at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis and Evelyn T. Patterson at
                    the United States Air Force Academy for introductory physics classes. JiTT makes
                    use of web technologies to present warm-up activities that students complete
                    online shortly before coming to class. Once the deadline for completing the
                    warm-up has passed, the instructor reviews student answers to focus on the areas
                    where they need help. Novak and Patterson explain that
                        "[t]hese answers are used as talking points for the instructor later
                            that morning, while the issue is still fresh in the students' minds. By
                            doing this, the instructor "individualizes" the lecture. Students in the
                            classroom recognize their own wording, both correct and incorrect, and
                            thus become engaged as part of the feedback loop. It is quite common for
                            the classroom discussion to continue via email between the instructor
                            and particular students. Paradoxically, technology used this way
                            encourages a more personal and intimate bond between instructors and
                            students. It is clear from course evaluations that students feel part of
                            a team working on a common project."
                    
                By surveying student performance before meeting them in the classroom, the
                    instructor has an idea of how well each student is learning and can prepare a
                    targeted lesson plan for the entire class. It is the balance between individual
                    attention and group dynamics that makes JiTT a promising component to electronic
                    pedagogy, particularly in the Humanities where students must learn how to engage
                    texts and ask their own questions.
                Through my use of the Web Cahier I have adapted JiTT to courses I teach in French
                    language, literature, and culture at Hartwick College. The Web Cahier leverages
                    the ease of accessibility offered by computer networks and holds each student
                    accountable for completing assignments. In my language courses, students watch
                    digitized audio and video clips on their laptops as they complete their homework
                    online. In my literature and culture courses, I give students warm-up questions
                    to guide their thinking as they make their way through assigned readings. In all
                    the courses where I use the Web Cahier, every student must complete an
                    assignment one or two hours before class. He or she can work incrementally on
                    the assignment, entering text into a web form, saving it, and returning to edit
                    what they have typed as often as they wish before the assignment deadline. After
                    a deadline has passed, students are unable to modify what they have done but
                    they can review their work and read instructor comments. When I evaluate a
                    student's work in the Web Cahier, I can give specific feedback for each
                    question. As a result, I come to class with a lesson plan adapted to the
                    specific needs of the students who I know have already engaged the material.
                Preliminary evaluations from students indicate that the Web Cahier has helped
                    improve their learning by encouraging timely completion of assignments which are
                    assessed before they meet with their instructor. Students feel they have a
                    greater stake in what goes on in the classroom because they know that the
                    instructor will use their work on the Web cahier to address their interests and
                    difficulties. Students, however, feel isolated when working with the Web Cahier:
                    they prefer the interaction that email, discussion boards, and chat rooms
                    afford. Some complain they are overworked in completing assignments, and they
                    resent the automatically enforced deadline which often causes them to feel
                    anxious about their work. As for the instructor, the amount of labor required to
                    prepare a lesson increases geometrically with every question posed to students.
                    The instructor may also feel overwhelmed in reviewing student work within a
                    narrow timeframe before class. The precision the Web Cahier offers in assessing
                    individual performance comes at the cost of a more directive and labor-intensive
                    pedagogy. In the paper I will present more definitive results from surveys of
                    students and other faculty who have used the Web Cahier. At this time it seems
                    evident that the Web Cahier can only provide one way to interact with students
                    outside the classroom. While it is important to guide and assess how students
                    are learning in a humanities course, there must be opportunities for discovery
                    and free play beyond the control of the instructor.

            
        
    
