


    
        
            
                Charles Brockden Brown: Quantitative Analysis and
                    Narrative Voice
                
                    
                        Larry
                        Stewart
                        
                            The College of Wooster
                            LStewart@wooster.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                In "Stephen Crane and the 'New York Tribune': a Case Study in Traditional and
                    Non-Traditional Authorship Attribution," a paper delivered at ALLC/ACH 2000,
                    David Holmes and Michael Robertson argue for the use of "objective, stylometric
                    evidence" to support "the 'traditional' scholarship on the problem of
                    authorship" and suggest that "this joint interdisciplinary approach should be
                    the way in which attributional research is conducted" (175) This paper presents
                    a case study to support the argument that such an interdisciplinary approach may
                    prove as important in literary analysis as in attribution studies.
                Of course, in one sense, this recognition of the symbiotic relationship between
                    traditional and quantitative analysis is not new. J. F. Burrows' groundbreaking
                    Computation into Criticism brilliantly and seamlessly moves between statistical
                    and traditional literary analysis and clearly recognizes the dialogue between
                    the two. As well, any number of papers coming out of this conference use
                    quantitative analysis to test or illustrate insights from literary criticism.
                    (See, for example, Opas and Tweedie, "The Magic Carpet Ride" and their "Come
                    into my World: Styles of Stance in Detective and Romantic Fiction" or McKenna's
                    "The Statistical Analysis of Style: How Language Means in Beckett.") However,
                    the value of using statistical analysis to augment traditional criticism appears
                    not to have been widely recognized and it seems important to continue to insist
                    on the insights that each approach may bring to the other.
                This case study concerns texts of Charles Brockden Brown, usually recognized as
                    the first professional novelist in the United States. For many years, Brown was
                    considered a relatively imprecise and careless stylist, who gave little
                    attention to character creation and particularly to narrative voice. However, a
                    revival of interest in Brown during the last fifteen to twenty years has brought
                    with it increased admiration for Brown as a stylist but with little close
                    examination of that style. The purpose of this study was to look more closely at
                    that style, particularly by examining the narrative voice in two texts: Wieland
                    or The Transformation (1798) and Carwin, The Biloquist (1803-1805). Wieland is a
                    novel of twenty-seven chapters, most of which are narrated by Clara Wieland, the
                    novel's Gothic heroine, but with three chapters narrated by each of three other
                    characters. Carwin is an unfinished novel, the first ten chapters of which were
                    published serially. Carwin, the Gothic villain of Wieland, narrates one chapter
                    of that novel and the whole of Carwin. The question with which this study began
                    was whether Brown had created in Carwin a character and narrator with a
                    distinctive voice, whether what we call the character Carwin is a distinct
                    literary or linguistic entity. If so, the evidence would seem to suggest greater
                    precision in the creation of narrative voice than has been traditionally
                    recognized.
                To determine differences or similarities in narrative voice, the study utilized a
                    variation on what is sometimes called the Burrow's technique, using multivariate
                    analysis to discover patterns in the occurrence rate of the text's most common
                    function words. However, along with the use of the fifty most common words, this
                    analysis included as variables the occurrence rate of punctuation marks
                    (periods, commas, question marks, exclamation points, semicolons, colons, and
                    ellipses) and of other stylistic markers such as sentence and paragraph length.
                    These variables included the rate of short and long sentences (defined as five
                    or fewer words and twenty-five or more words), short and long paragraphs
                    (defined as fifty or fewer words and one hundred and twenty-five or more words),
                    average words per sentence, average sentences per paragraph, and percentage of
                    unique words. The latter variables were added because in the analysis of a
                    sample of fifteen late-eighteenth- and early-nineteenth-century novels, the
                    addition of these variables appeared substantially to increase the sensitivity
                    of the analysis. The presentation will discuss the variables which were most
                    effective in making discriminations. With the addition of these variables, a
                    principle components analysis was made for each chapter in Wieland and Carwin,
                    and the results of the two most significant factors were displayed on a scatter
                    graph. These results show a clear distinction between most of the chapters in
                    Wieland and those in Carwin. (See Figure 1.)
                
                With the addition of these variables, a principle components analysis was made
                    for each chapter in Wieland and Carwin, and the results of the two most
                    significant factors were displayed on a scatter graph. These results show a
                    clear distinction between most of the chapters in Wieland and those in Carwin.
                    (See Figure 1.) However, chapter twenty-three of Wieland, the chapter narrated
                    by the character Carwin, is clearly situated among the chapters from Carwin.
                    Thus, it would seem that the narrative voice of Carwin is distinctive, that
                    Brown has created a character whose voice in one novel is recognizable as his
                    voice in the other.
                Those results might have concluded the study were it not for the fact that two
                    other chapters from Wieland are situated in the constellation of Carwin
                    chapters, chapter twenty-seven, the final chapter of the novel, and chapter
                    thirteen, a chapter narrated by another character, Pleyel, a romantic interest
                    of the protagonist, Clara Wieland. It is when considering and attempting to
                    explain the location of these two chapters among those from Carwin that the
                    strongest case can be made for the joint use of quantitative and traditional
                    literary analysis. It is not just that quantitative analysis may support and
                    supply evidence for traditional approaches but that traditional analysis may
                    help us understand what we are seeing in the results of quantitative analysis.
                Upon reflection, the analyst should probably not be surprised to find the
                    narration of Clara in the final chapter to have much in common with the
                    narrative voice of Carwin. Critics have long noted that Clara's voice in the
                    final chapter undergoes a transformation, and some have even suggested that
                    Clara has come ultimately under the influence of Carwin, whose villainy
                    throughout has been associated with his powers of ventriloquism. That he has
                    thrown his voice a final time and taken over the voice of the dominant narrator
                    has been at least hinted by critics. Quantitative analysis supports such an
                    interpretation, and the interpretation helps the quantitative analyst to
                    understand his or her results.
                The initially more problematic finding is the location of chapter thirteen of
                    Wieland among the chapters from Carwin. Since it is a chapter narrated by
                    Pleyel, one might speculate that the narrator Clara has one voice and all other
                    narrators have another. However, such an explanation does not account for
                    chapter nineteen, narrated by Theodore Wieland, which differs both from the
                    chapters narrated by Carwin and from those narrated by Clara. The more likely
                    explanation comes from Steven Watts, who, in his book The Romance of Real Life:
                    Charles Brockden Brown and the Origins of American Culture, comments on the
                    usually unrecognized similarities of Pleyel and Carwin and, in fact, finds
                    Carwin to be the alter ego of Pleyel. Although this interpretation has not
                    gained wide currency, the similarities in voice indicated by the statistical
                    analysis suggest that it might be reconsidered.
                These findings seem to support what J. F. Burrows points out: "that exact
                    evidence, often couched in the unfamiliar language of statistics, does have a
                    distinct bearing on questions of importance in the territory of literary
                    interpretation and judgement" (2). However, the findings also suggest that
                    traditional critical interpretation has a real bearing on how we understand the
                    meaning of those statistics.
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    F.
                                    Burrows
                                
                            
                            Computation into Criticism: A Study of Jane Austen and
                                an Experiment in Method
                            
                                Oxford
                                Clarendon Press
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Bill
                                    Christophersen
                                
                            
                            The Apparition in the Glass: Charles Brockden Brown's
                                American Gothic
                            
                                Athens and London
                                U of Georgia Press
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    I.
                                    Holmes
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Robertson
                                
                            
                            Stephen Crane and the 'New-York Tribune': a Case Study
                                in Traditional and Non-traditional Authorship Attribution
                        
                        
                            Paper delivered at ALLC/ACH 2000
                            
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    W.
                                    F.
                                    McKenna
                                
                            
                            The Statistical Analysis of Style: How Language Means
                                in Beckett
                        
                        
                            Abstracts of the ALLC/ACH Conference 2000, Glasgow
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    L.
                                    L.
                                    Opas
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    F.
                                    J.
                                    Tweedie
                                
                            
                            The Magic Carpet Ride: Reader Involvement n Romantic
                                Fiction
                        
                        
                            Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                            
                                14
                                1
                                89-101
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    L.
                                    L.
                                    Opas
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    F.
                                    J.
                                    Tweedie
                                
                            
                            Come into my World: Styles of Stance in Detective and
                                Romantic Fiction
                        
                        
                            Abstracts of the ALLC/ACH Conference 1999, Virginia
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                                247
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Donald
                                    A.
                                    Ringe
                                
                            
                            Charles Brockden Brown
                            
                                New York
                                Twayne
                                1966
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Steven
                                    Watts
                                
                            
                            The Romance of Real Life: Charles Brockden Brown and
                                the Origins of American Culture
                            
                                Baltimore and London
                                Johns Hopkins
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
