


    
        
            
                Ivanhoe: A Game of Interpretation
                
                    
                        Geoffrey
                        Rockwell
                        
                            McMaster University and University of Virginia
                            grockwel@mcmaster.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Johanna
                        Drucker
                        
                            University of Virginia, Media Studies
                                jrd8e@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Bethany
                        Nowviskie
                        
                            University of Virginia, SpecLab
                                bethany@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Andrea
                        Laue
                        
                            University of Virginia, SpecLab
                                akl3s@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jerome
                        McGann
                        
                            University of Virginia, English
                                jjm2f@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Chandler
                        Sansing
                        
                            Henley Middle School, Virginia
                                csansing@albemarle.org
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Nathan
                        Piazza
                        
                            University of Virginia, ITC Group
                                piazza@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                        Ivanhoe: A Game of Interpretation
                        Jerome McGann
                        Johanna Drucker
                        
                            To date, the digital technology used by humanities scholars has
                                focused almost exclusively on methods of sorting, accessing, and
                                disseminating large bodies of materials. In this respect the work
                                has not engaged the central questions and concerns of the
                                disciplines. It is largely seen as technical and pre-critical, the
                                occupation of librarians, and archivists, and editors. The general
                                field of humanities education and scholarship will not take up the
                                use of digital technology in any significant way until one can
                                clearly demonstrate that these tools have important contributions to
                                make to the exploration and explanation of aesthetic works.
                            The Ivanhoe Game has been developed to begin such a demonstration.
                                Its purpose is to use digital tools and space to reflect critically
                                on received aesthetic works (like novels) and on the processes of
                                critical reflection that one brings to such works. Digital tools
                                bring great advantages to these kinds of reflective goals. First of
                                all, because digital environments increase one’s resources for
                                morphing and transforming aesthetic works, they are apt for
                                exploiting the inherently transformational character of such works.
                                Second, the tools also foster acts of reflection by diversified
                                persons and groups, and their storage mechanisms greatly augment the
                                scale and number of interactive dynamic relations. Third, the
                                environment encourages a (so to speak) theatrical deployment of
                                these operations. Ivanhoe Game players will intervene and engage
                                with aesthetic works in performative ways, and -- equally important
                                -- they will act in spaces that put their critical and reflective
                                operations on clear display. If the game is thus, most immediately,
                                a game of critical reflection/aesthetic interpretation, it is
                                ultimately a game for studying and reflecting on those acts of
                                critical reflection themselves. Finally, that its critical
                                reflection is executed in game form is crucial. Humanities
                                scholarship without gameplay, even when the scholarship explicitly
                                devotes itself to self-reflection, inevitably fails to engage with
                                essential features of the works it means to study, including the
                                workings of the mind engaged with such works.
                            The co-creators of the Ivanhoe Game, Jerome McGann and Johanna
                                Drucker, will make an introductory essay on the project available to
                                the audience before the conference.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Is Gaming Serious Research in the Humanities?
                        Geoffrey Rockwell
                        
                            Games are used to teach the humanities not for research. We are not
                                even comfortable studying games seriously, let alone proposing that
                                games could be a form of research. It is only recently that computer
                                games have become the subject of serious humanities inquiry. [1] Espen Aarseth in his editorial "Computer Game
                                    Studies, Year 1", which introduces the newly launched journal
                                        Game Studies, writes that "2001 can
                                    be seen as the Year One of Computer Game Studies as an emerging,
                                    viable, international, academic field." &lt;&gt; At the same time there is a tradition that
                                proposes that what we do in the humanities is a form of play, even
                                if it is serious play. In theorists like Huizinga, Bakhtin, and
                                Gadamer play is presented as a component of humanities
                                    practice.[2] See the section "Play as the clue to
                                    ontological explanation" in Truth and
                                    Method, page 101 and following. The playful
                                dimension of the dialogue of the humanities is that which
                                distinguishes our (hermeneutical) methods from those in the social
                                and natural sciences. If we want to resist becoming a (human)
                                science we need to reassert the playfulness of representation and
                                interpretation. That means acknowledging the place of games and game
                                theory in our practice.
                            In this component of the panel Geoffrey Rockwell will make the case
                                for building games and playing them as a way of modeling and then
                                reflecting on our activities that is in the spirit of the
                                humanities. Geoffrey Rockwell was invited to sit in on the design of
                                the Game and will provide a concluding presentation that reflects on
                                the witnessed process of developing Ivanhoe as itself a recognizable
                                form of research that combines the play of the symposium with the
                                implementation demands of digital practice.
                        
                    
                    
                        References
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            M.
                                            M.
                                            Bakhtin
                                        
                                    
                                    The Dialogic Imagination; Four Essays by M. M.
                                        Bakhtin
                                    University of Texas Press Slavic Series
                                    
                                        Trans.
                                        
                                            Caryl
                                            Emerson
                                        
                                        
                                            Michael
                                            Holquist
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        No. 1
                                        Austin
                                        University of Texas Press
                                        1981
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            M.
                                            M.
                                            Bakhtin
                                        
                                    
                                    Speech Genres and Other Late Essays
                                    University of Texas Slavic Series
                                    
                                        Trans.
                                        
                                            Vern
                                            W.
                                            McGee
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        No. 8
                                        Austin, Texas
                                        University of Texas Press
                                        1986
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Hans-Georg
                                            Gadamer
                                        
                                    
                                    Truth and Method
                                    2nd Edition
                                    
                                        Trans.
                                        
                                            Joel
                                            Weinsheimer
                                        
                                        
                                            Donald
                                            G.
                                            Marshall
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        New York
                                        Continuum
                                        1996
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Johan
                                            Huizinga
                                        
                                    
                                    Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in
                                        Culture
                                    
                                        Boston
                                        Beacon Press
                                        1950
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        A Wrinkle in Play: Building the Ivanhoe Game for Classroom Flexibility
                        Chandler Sansing
                        
                            Secondary school teacher Chandler Sansing will discuss tests of the
                                Ivanhoe Game in several classroom contexts and will show
                                student-generated game material. Five major classroom case studies
                                and several in-house beta tests have been undertaken, using (among
                                others) the texts of Scott's Ivanhoe,
                                Bronte's Wuthering Heights, Shelley's
                                    Frankenstein, L'Engle's A Wrinkle in Time, CS Lewis's Narnia books and
                                Henry James's The Turn of the Screw as
                                discourse fields. These practical exercises, conducted without the
                                use of a highly-articulated software framework for organizing player
                                moves and enforcing rule systems, are helping to reveal latent
                                assumptions in the game model and shape its implementation. Sansing
                                will argue that the strengths of successful instructional
                                technologies lie in their flexibility -- that teachers need
                                open-ended software they can adapt to their evolving content areas
                                and specialized methodologies. Proposals for a user-configurable
                                Ivanhoe Game rule and scoring system which builds this flexibility
                                into the software model are presently under consideration.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        The Ivanhoe Development Process: Managing Complexity and Communication
                        Nathan Piazza
                        
                            The developers of the Ivanhoe Game are, most of us, veterans of other
                                development projects affiliated with the University of Virginia's
                                Media Studies Program or Institute for Advanced Technologies in the
                                Humanities. By now we are well-versed in the difficulties of
                                navigating the waters of digital humanities development efforts.
                                However, Ivanhoe presents a unique challenge in the sense that it is
                                not chiefly a collections initiative, nor is it a straightforward
                                software development project. Instead, it will be a medium for doing
                                pedagogical and critical work in ways that, frankly, have rarely
                                been done before. As a result, it has been crucial for the
                                participants in the Ivanhoe group to develop satisfying methods of
                                working together, methods that insure that every voice is heard
                                while still sustaining the momentum of the project. Successful
                                communication of complex ideas between humanists and technicians has
                                been, and will continue to be, essential to the project's success,
                                because the form and structure of the application itself is the project. As a result, we have
                                down-streamed the issue of user experience, answering questions of
                                interface and interactivity even before the development of the data
                                models. This has allowed us to identify issues that might make our
                                technical infrastructure too inflexible to meet the rigorous goals
                                we have set for game play quality. We have used a process that is
                                informal, and iterative, taking inspiration from the idea that
                                software is built more after the fashion of a novel than a
                                skyscraper. It evolves over time through a process of constant
                                revision, and no set of blueprints will survive the construction
                                phase without alteration. Nathan Piazza will discuss the way of
                                working that has allowed us to continue to sustain ourselves with
                                the creative verve and critical insights from which the project
                                vision first evolved, even as we fit that vision into an
                                appropriately constraining technical framework.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Implementing Ivanhoe: Modelling a Discourse Field 
                        Andrea Laue
                        
                            I will review past, present and proposed implementations of the
                                Ivanhoe Game, focusing on the construction and representation of the
                                discourse field [1] Our working definition of
                                    discourse field is: "the historical set of artifacts that
                                    includes and describes a text; the expanded bibliographic
                                    universe that invests a cultural artifact.". Particular
                                issues discussed include the modeling and visualization of the game
                                text, the association of roles and players, and the display and
                                typing of links [2] Our working definition of game
                                    text is: "the (virtual) artifact that is generated by a
                                    particular instance of the game.".
                            Played using email, Blogger or pen and ink, early instances of the
                                Ivanhoe Game couldn't produce an adequate game text. In addition,
                                these implementations didn't offer the option of anonymous roles. In
                                the prototype, we used XML, XSLT and JSP's to build a game text with
                                a corresponding visualization. The prototype also made possible the
                                separation of players and roles, prompting a debate about the
                                relationship between the two and the related game text. In our
                                forthcoming beta, we will build a more robust game text and
                                correspondingly more sophisticated visualizations. I will discuss
                                topic maps and their potential for modeling discourse fields and
                                generating game texts in the beta [3] For an
                                    introduction to topic maps, see Steve Pepper, "The TAO of Topic
                                    Maps," XML Europe 2000.. Although most often used to
                                structure metadata that describes existing corpora, topic maps also
                                present tremendous potential for generating dynamic documents and
                                visualizations, separating roles and players, and typing links and
                                moves in a manner that might someday be useful for rules and points
                                engines [4] For other interesting applications of
                                    topic maps, see James David Mason, "Ferrets and Topic Maps:
                                    Knowledge Engineering for an Analytical Engine," XML Europe
                                    2001, and Jack Park, "Bringing Knowledge Technologies to the
                                    Classroom", Knowledge Technologies 2001..
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Patterns and Models: Some Applications of Game Theory to Digital Game
                            Design
                        Bethany Nowviskie
                        
                            Until recently, game and educational software makers have worked
                                intuitively, virtually ignoring established ontologies and fields of
                                enquiry in engineering, design, and the humanities. However,
                                pressures in the industry are creating a new impetus toward
                                establishing a common vocabulary which critics, theorists, and
                                developers can employ to analyze games. As an introduction to the
                                use of models and pattern languages in digital game development,
                                Bethany Nowviskie will describe a branch of game theory called
                                mechanism design, with particular attention to models employing
                                Denettian or irrational agents as players in non-zero sum games and
                                games of incomplete information. Economic game theory, as an
                                interdisciplinary approach to analyzing human behavior and the
                                interaction of agents in closed systems, offers digital game
                                designers a rich vocabulary with which to express and interrogate
                                game models. Mechanism design employs the same vocabulary in
                                developing algorithms for games -- like Ivanhoe -- involving
                                multiple self-interested agents, each with private objectives and
                                preferred outcomes. Nowviskie will discuss the evolution and testing
                                of game models in Ivanhoe and suggest that, by taking an intentional
                                stance toward the computer as player, designers could appropriate
                                and adapt formal, game-theoretic patterns to aid in digital game
                                creation and analysis.
                        
                    
                    
                        References
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            C.
                                            Alexander
                                        
                                    
                                    Notes on the Synthesis of Form
                                    
                                        
                                        Harvard UP
                                        1964
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            C.
                                            Alexander
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            S.
                                            Ishikawa
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            M.
                                            Silverstein
                                        
                                    
                                    A Pattern Language
                                    
                                        
                                        Oxford University Press
                                        1977
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            D.
                                            Church
                                        
                                    
                                    Formal Abstract Design Tools
                                
                                
                                    Game Developer Magazine
                                    
                                        3
                                        28
                                        
                                        July 1999
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            C.
                                            Crawford
                                        
                                    
                                    The Art of Computer Game Design
                                    
                                        
                                        McGraw-Hill
                                        1984
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            D.
                                            Dennett
                                        
                                    
                                    The Intentional Stance
                                    
                                        
                                        Bradford Books
                                        1987
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            B.
                                            Kreimeier
                                        
                                    
                                    Content Patterns in Game Design
                                
                                
                                    Proceedings of the GDC 2002
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        2002
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            D.
                                            Nguyen
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            S.
                                            Wong
                                        
                                    
                                    Design Patterns for Games
                                
                                
                                    SIGCSE 2002
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        2002
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            A.
                                            Rollings
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            D.
                                            Morris
                                        
                                    
                                    Game Architecture and Design.
                                    
                                        
                                        The Coriolis Group
                                        2000
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            D.
                                            Ross
                                        
                                    
                                    Dennett's Conceptual Reform
                                
                                
                                    Behavior and Philosophy
                                    
                                        22
                                        1
                                        
                                        1994
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
