


    
        
            
                Shuhai Wenyuan Interactive Internet Worktable: Studying
                    Ancient Chinese Philosophy On-Line
                
                    
                        Brian
                        Bruya
                        
                            University of Hawaii
                            shuhai@hawaii.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                There are four major digital library projects in East Asia that publish digital
                    versions of parts of the vast pre-modern Chinese corpus on the World Wide Web.
                    All of these are targeted at professional sinologists, with no accommodation for
                    the user who is not expertly proficient in Chinese. As a result, anyone
                    interested in seriously engaging Chinese thought online must either set aside a
                    few years to learn Classical Chinese or remain beholden to the sinologist for
                    both information and interpretation. At Shuhai Wenyuan, a project funded by the
                    National Science Foundation's Digital Libraries Initiative (Phase II), we strive
                    to capitalize on the advantages of digitization to allow the non-sinologist
                    entry into the conceptual world of ancient Chinese thought.
                Begun in October of 2000, Shuhai Wenyuan will offer a set of Chinese classics,
                    English translations of these classics, a hyperlinked lexicon, a grammar, a
                    philosophical resource, and a search engine for rapidly viewing the full
                    contexts of important terms in a variety a texts. The aim is access--most
                    immediately for scholars and students to be able to read Classical Chinese texts
                    with enough resources that they will be able to reach their own conclusions
                    about interpretation and then employ the texts in original scholarly pursuits;
                    and in the longer term for teachers to be able to provide courses in Chinese
                    Philosophy, either online or in the classroom, without having to be concerned
                    about the scarcity of appropriate resources.
                There are four salient features of Shuhai Wenyuan that we will present in our poster:
                        1. Software: As a project developed by
                            humanists rather than computer scientists, and as a project intended to
                            be replicated by other humanists, Shuhai Wenyuan employs powerful
                            off-the-shelf database software called 4D. We will demonstrate how this
                            results in streamlined and cost-effective administration and modular
                            replicability without compromising design flexibility, expandability, or
                            data integrity.
                        2. Worktable: Our user interface employs
                            frames to replicate the scholar's worktable on which one may have open
                            several books at once for simultaneous perusal. We will demonstrate how
                            side-by-side textual viewing enhances the research usability and how the
                            Worktable can be customized by individual users in a variety of
                            ways.
                        3. Tools: A portion of the Worktable is
                            devoted to textual viewing and another to viewing research tools,
                            specifically, a grammar, an encyclopedic lexicon, and a search engine.
                            We will demonstrate how each of these tools is easily put to work using
                            hyperlinks between the texts and tools and among tools.
                        4. Philosophy: One of the most difficult
                            parts of working with foreign language texts is that
                            philosophically-laden terms lose their conceptual contexts in
                            translation and acquire misleading conceptual contexts in the target
                            language, so that a term such as tian in
                            Chinese inevitably becomes Heaven in English, capitalized and with
                            built-in Judeo-Christian connotations of an omnipotent, anthropomorphic
                            deity and the promise of salvation. One of the most significant features
                            of Shuhai Wenyuan is our work organizing and presenting secondary
                            literature on key philosophical terms. If one were to research the term
                                tian in an analog library, it would take
                            days of paging through book and periodical indexes to find significant
                            treatments of it in the secondary literature. We are bringing these
                            resources into our own library, digitizing them, and culling the
                            relevant passages for inclusion under individual entries in the lexicon.
                            The textual tools and texts themselves, when combined with our
                            philosophical resource, allow the novice reader of Chinese thought
                            unprecedented access to this important body of texts. Instead of
                            providing the reader with a single limited interpretation of a text, we
                            offer users the entire conceptual universe of Chinese thought at their
                            fingertips, allowing them to work creatively from it. 
                    
                Shuhai Wenyuan is a three-year DLI-2 project with one year remaining as of
                    7/2002. We project to have all of the Chinese texts and English translations up
                    by then, a portion of the philosophy resource, the entire grammar, the search
                    engine, and a portion of the lexicon.
                We invite the reader to visit our site at .
            
        
    
