


    
        
            
                The virtual classroom: Videoconferencing for foreign
                    language learners
                
                    
                        Werner
                        Wegstein
                        
                            Universität Würzburg
                            wegstein@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Derek
                        Lewis
                        
                            University of Exeter
                            D.R.Lewis@exeter.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Institutional environment
                    In the mid-1980s the University of Exeter (Project Pallas) and the University
                        of Würzburg ('Linguistic Information and Text Processing') initiated courses
                        in Humanities Computing for undergraduate and postgraduate students. Student
                        and staff exchange programmes within the Erasmus/Socrates framework of the
                        European Union followed soon afterwards. By 1995 Exeter had launched its
                        ReLaTe project, to investigate the use of multimedia internet conferencing
                        for 'Remote Language Teaching (Buckett and Stringer 1997) together with
                        University College, London. Following on from this co-operation, trials with
                        the new medium were extended to investigate the feasibility of delivering
                        inter-university academic courses across national borders. A report on this
                        was published by the Würzburg Computing Centre in 1999 (Fahrner and Plehn
                        1999) and the results demonstrated at the CALL -
                            Challenge of Change conference at Exeter (2001). Here the authors
                        presented a scenario for providing and managing conversation classes
                        designed to allow students to practise foreign language skills with native
                        speakers across Europe using freely available videoconferencing tools
                        (Buckett et al. 2001). The study was based on work with first year students
                        of German at Exeter and postgraduate students of Humanities computing at
                        Würzburg learning English for special purposes. Building on this experience
                        we now outline the next stage in creating virtual classrooms based on
                        videoconferencing software: There are two aims. One is to extend the
                        conversation class setting to one in which students of English/German are
                        studying the language of IT and technical communication; this will enable an
                        investigation of the problems associated with the restrictions imposed by
                        the subject area in the context of 'live' videoconferencing. The second aim
                        is to record authentic class communication in order to build up an archive
                        illustrating the variety of interactions that may be exploited to teach
                        English/German for special purposes in the field of IT.
                
                
                    Impact of the new media: hardware, netware and software
                    Using a PC to see and talk to someone else working at a remote location
                        requires specific hardware (camera, graphics and audio cards, microphone and
                        headset) as well as software and netware tools to create and manage the
                        connection. Linking more than one PC at each location normally generates a
                        considerable load on the network. Using software for the Mbone configured to
                        handle multicast traffic, however, all participants can communicate with
                        each other efficiently and on equal terms (for details see Kumar 1996).
                    Online conversation with native language speakers creates a completely
                        different environment for language learning, compared with the standard
                        'schoolroom' setting of conversation classes. Normally foreign language
                        students, who outside class would communicate in their native language,
                        switch to a foreign language in order to discuss problems with their
                        teachers, language assistant or tutor. Using internet mediated communication
                        these students are able to practise naturally with native speakers, with all
                        the advantages which that entails: they learn to cope with regional
                        differences in speech, develop authentic communication strategies in the
                        foreign language, and become sensitive to the effect of subtle changes in
                        voice pitch, the function of pauses and to the vital area of non-verbal
                        communication. The very act of talking to native speakers (instead of each
                        other) is likely to stimulate the use of a quite different set of words and
                        syntactic structures.
                    In a normal face-to-face conversation class all the participants are in one
                        room, know each other and can draw on the physical/spatial dimensions of
                        speech events: sensing the direction of the sound, they can detect who is
                        speaking, can face him/her and use cues (such as the length of a pause) to
                        judge when he/she has finished in order to take a turn. Communicating via
                        the virtual internet, however, alters the spatial and perceptual context
                        appreciably: the participants are not in the same room; they do not know all
                        the other participants; they can hear in their headphone that some one is
                        speaking, although there is no direction of sound that could help them to
                        identify the speaker; and the audio signal in their headphones lags
                        perceptibly behind the video signal on screen, so that they may
                        misunderstand a slight pause as a signal to take over, prompting them to
                        interrupt the speaker. This lack of conversational coordination leads to a
                        kind of stop-and-go interaction in which more than one speaker starts to
                        take a turn, realizes that others have done the same, stops, and pauses for
                        quite a long time to establish who will finally dare to continue.
                    There is also a direct spatial relationship between the physical speech and
                        the visual information displayed on the computer screen. The size of the
                        person taking part in a face-to-face conversation class is greatly reduced
                        in the virtual, on-screen internet environment: here the size varies from
                        thumbnail (in the list of displayed participants) up to a maximum of a CIF
                        image. For the internet participants, who are not in the same room and do
                        not necessarily know each other, it is therefore indispensable to customize
                        the screen layout by captioning each window with the name of the speaker, so
                        that all the members of the conference know who he/she is.
                    The above factors have implications for positioning the video camera: this
                        should be as close to the screen the student is looking at as possible, so
                        that the listeners feel addressed by what the speaker is saying and the
                        speaker gets the impression that the others are attending to what he is
                        explaining (the so-called Casablanca Effect or
                        'Here's-looking-at-you'-principle). Ideally the camera image needs to be
                        large enough for the viewers to be able to see the speakers' facial
                        expressions (and possibly even to watch lip movements), whilst at the same
                        time having a sufficiently large field of vision that they can also see
                        gestures and general body language. The size of the conversation windows and
                        the screen hardware used (17 inches minimum) define the maximum number of
                        participants that can be handled effectively. We tested settings between
                        three and eight participants: with eight participants the conversation was
                        most lively, but not all participants took an active part in it; with three
                        or four participants all were really active. We measured the degree of
                        activity by comparing the number of sound packages sent by each participant.
                    We illustrate these problems and related questions by video clips from our
                        initial corpus, which are discussed below.
                    
                        (1) An impact factor in the new medium is the relationship between the
                            audio and the visual dimension for the participants. Issues here
                            include: the size of the visual image of a speaker on the screen; the
                            role of direct eye contact; the ability to see more than the face (or
                            mouth) and the question how far the medium does intrude into the
                            interaction or otherwise inhibit it. Is there a relationship between the
                            language level (or even the language itself) and the influence of the
                            medium?
                        (2) Our experience so far suggests that the management of 'turns' or
                            hand-overs in the discourse is of particular interest. For instance, how
                            does a participant gain the attention of the group? How does one
                            interject? How is the participation of listeners registered if their
                            visual presence is reduced? Does a group need a designated manager of
                            the discourse or is interaction completely open? Should the group be
                            aware of 'rules' or procedures for managing interaction? What form
                            should these take?
                        (3) We show representative scenes that we intend to include in our
                            database of videoclips illustrating typical communicative interactions.
                            These clips will be transcribed using standard transcription systems for
                            discourse analysis (Edwards and Lampert 1993, Selting et al. 1998). The
                            materials will be used to introduce and prepare future students for
                            technical communication in a foreign language. In addition we plan to
                            use them for further research on how to enhance learning opportunities
                            and develop the communicative skills of students (studying, for
                            instance, technical translation) in an environment which offers
                            multimedia support.
                    
                    We are aware that much research and activity are being undertaken in this
                        field and we will compare our experiences with the results of broader and
                        more general approaches to using the internet for teaching. Such approaches
                        may not necessarily include the use of live videocommunication in class (cf.
                        Warschauer 1999 and Warschauer, Shetzer and Meloni 2000).
                    In conclusion, our experience suggests that it is possible to enhance
                        interactive communication skills in the virtual internet medium but that
                        more research is needed to identify the optimum parameters for co-ordinating
                        the needs of learners in groups with the medium itself. In this paper we
                        focus on German-English interactions for the purposes of general
                        communication, with emphasis on initiating conversation, greetings,
                        turn-taking, eliciting information, and overcoming communication obstacles.
                        The corpus material will provide a searchable textbase that can be compared
                        with instances of classroom interaction and exploited for pedagogical
                        purposes.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Buckett
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    N.
                                    Datta
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Lewis
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    Stringer
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Plehn
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Ruff
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Tscherner
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    W.
                                    Wegstein
                                
                            
                            Conversation classes across Europe: A challenge for
                                videoconferencing
                        
                        
                            C.A.L.L. The Challenge of Change. Research and Practice
                            
                                Presented by
                                
                                    K.
                                    Cameron
                                
                            
                            
                                Exeter
                                Elm Bank Publications
                                2001
                                169-176
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Buckett
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    B.
                                    Stringer
                                
                            
                            ReLaTe: Progress, Problems and Potential
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of CALL'97, Exeter, September 1997
                            
                                
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Fahrner
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Plehn
                                
                            
                            Was ist Mbone?
                        
                        
                            Benutzermitteilungen Rechenzentrum Universität
                                Würzburg, Juni 1999
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                                24-27
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    V.
                                    Kumar
                                
                            
                            Mbone. Interactive Multimedia on the Internet
                            
                                Indianapolis
                                New Rider
                                1996
                            
                        
                        Mbone information in Germany is provided by "Beratungszentrum für
                            Videokonferenzdienste" at the Technical University of Dresden (), multicast is supported
                            very efficiently as standard service by the DFN consortium ("Deutsches
                            Forschungsnetz") in Germany; in the UK for Mbone software see .
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Schwitalla
                                
                            
                            Gesprochenes Deutsch. Eine Einführung.
                            Grundlagen der Germanistik 35
                            
                                Berlin
                                Erich Schmitt
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    A.
                                     Edwards
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    D.
                                    Lampert
                                
                            
                            Talking Data. Transcription and coding in discourse
                                research
                            
                                Hillsdale
                                Lawrence Erlbaum
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Selting
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Auer
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    B.
                                    Barden
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Bergmann
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    Couper-Kuhlen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Günthner
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Meier
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    U.
                                    Quasthoff
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Schlobinski
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Uhmann
                                
                            
                            Gesprächsanalytisches Transkriptionssystem
                            (GAT)
                        
                        
                            Linguistische Berichte
                            
                                
                                173
                                91-122
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Warschauer
                                
                            
                            Electronic literacies: Language, culture, and power in
                                online education
                            
                                Hillsdale
                                Lawrence Erlbaum
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Warschauer
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Shetzer
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Meloni
                                
                            
                            Internet for English Language Teaching
                            
                                Alexandria, Virgina
                                Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages
                                    (TESOL), Inc.
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
