


    
        
            
                Human-machine communication by voice (A multimedia
                    tutorial for linguists and engineers)
                
                    
                        Magdolna
                        Kovács
                        Department of General and Applied Liniguistics, Debrecen University
                            mkovacs@fox.klte.hu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Péter
                        Nikléczy
                        
                            Kempelen Farkas Speech Research Laboratory
                            nikleczy@nytud.hu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Gábor
                        Olaszy
                        
                            Kempelen Farkas Speech Research Laboratory
                            olaszy@nytud.hu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    1. Introduction
                    Human-machine communication by voice is one of the most dynamically
                        developing fields in information technology. Since human speech in its oral
                        form is the most natural and compact means for communication, it should be
                        used for information exchange in any technical innovation, new technology,
                        as widely as possible. Speech technology is inevitably gaining greater and
                        greater importance in computing.
                    Speech technology is a relatively new field in applied science, and it is
                        strongly interdisciplinary. It integrates both human and engineering
                        sciences such as theoretical and applied linguistics, acoustic phonetics,
                        physiology, mathematics, software engineering, database handling. Although
                        for several years it has been widely recognized, that for success, it is
                        essential to combine these disciplines in education, it is still hardly
                        reflected in higher education curricula [1]. The reason is obvious: it is an
                        essential but a painfully hard task to build the bridges between the various
                        disciplines involved in speech technology, to show its basis in its all
                        complexity.
                    In support of, or, instead of interdisciplinary curricula, special subject
                        oriented courseware should be offered to the students. Multimedia tutorials
                        are, undoubtedly, the most suitable teaching aids in speech communication
                        sciences and for several reasons. Multimedia in this case does not simple
                        offer novel ways of presenting unfamiliar material but it suits best both
                        the nature of human speech itself and the technical requirements of the
                        subject; it provides tools for experiments, creative, problem-solving
                        learning; for the development of necessary skills in e.g. labeling speech,
                        reading spectrograms and it offers extensive resources for ear- training.
                        For the past few years a number of computer assisted learning systems have
                        been developed in the field, the variety of which demonstrates the range of
                        the topics covered, the anticipated knowledge and utilization of interactive
                        elements [1, 2].
                    In this paper we will introduce a new multimedia tutorial "Speech technology
                        for Hungarian" and highlight some of the methodological and technical
                        problems associated with the development of multimedia applications in
                        speech communication sciences.
                
                
                    2. Outlines of the content
                    The multimedia tutorial introduces main features of speech technology.
                        "Speech technology for Hungarian" summaries a kind of knowledge that is not
                        taught as a complex course in Hungarian higher education institutions and
                        presents it in a form suited for independent self- instruction by students.
                        The objective of the tutorial is to provide a starting point for improving
                        the training of future Hungarian linguists and speech technologists. For
                        linguistics students it can help to turn from traditional articulatory
                        phonetics towards state-of-the-art speech science and prepare them to solve
                        important issues in the practical application of speech. For engineers it
                        provides the linguistic basis for speech science, the lack of which explains
                        the low quality of some existing applications.
                    The tutorial consists of seven units: 1. Anatomy and physiology of speech
                        production and hearing; 2. Physics of sound; 3. Speech acoustics; 4. The
                        Hungarian speech; 5. Speech synthesis; 6. Speech recognition by machine; 7.
                        Digital speech processing, and provides a glossary of terms and an annotated
                        reference list of relevant literature for the past five years. To tailor the
                        content material to the target users we decided not to deal in detail with
                        the underlying mathematics of signal processing, Unit 7 outlines only the
                        main and most widely used digital speech processing techniques such as FFT,
                        LPC, PSOLA, HMM. At the same time, the tutorial pays special attention to
                        language specific issues. So, for example, Unit 4 offers a collection of
                        extensive articulatory and acoustic data on the segmental and suprasegmental
                        building elements as well as thorough description of rules for the Hungarian
                        language; in Unit 6 separate parts deal with the definition of language
                        dependent rule sets for duration modelling, for the adjustment of correct
                        intensity values in the case of each soun and for the modelling of the
                        structure of the fundamental frequency changes in time (sound, syllable,
                        word, phrase, sentence and text level). Each unit ends with exercises for
                        self-assessment.
                
                
                     3. Technical Issues
                    One of the first main questions that arises is the selection of the
                        developing tool. In spite of the fact that the audio capabilities of early
                        versions Java were quite restricted, Web-browser executable Java softwares
                        have rapidly gain ground in speech science CAL-systems for their platform
                        independence and computational capabilities. Before Java 1.3 one did not
                        have speech input capability; audio playback was restricted to a-low or
                        mu-low coded 8 bit quality, what is certainly unsuitable for a course about
                        the understanding of the real nature of the sound. With sound handling
                        becoming much more versatile in Java 1.3, we decided to implement the
                        tutorial using relatively cost-saving and platform-independent tools:
                        standard HTML including Java 1.3 and other plug-ins - Flash 5.0 and
                        QuickTime 5.0 for animations and video elements.
                
                
                    4. An Example
                    For demonstration, let us quote the tutorial material on speeding up and
                        slowing down the tempo of speech signal. To fit into the time-limits of a TV
                        or radio commercial or for psychological experiments the artificial
                        manipulation of speech tempo has to be implemented without changing pitch
                        and distorting the quality of the sound. The basic technical issues in
                        speech processing are the determination of cutting or pasting periods, short
                        segments of sounds. The question is what stretches of the signal to choose
                        to minimize the distortion. There are different solutions to this problem,
                        most of them based on mathematical methods applied uniformly to the speech
                        signal. The tutorial material leads the student through the steps of working
                        out an algorithm that accounts for the acoustic structure of different sets
                        of sounds and the contextual changes in the formant frequencies [3]. This
                        algorithm fits the best the main aim of the courseware: to show how the
                        understanding of the nature of the sounds can be utilized in practical
                        applications. The section is based upon with interactive elements by the
                        help of which students themselves can manipulate the tempo of the speech
                        examples.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    Bloothoft
                                 et al 
                            The Landscape of Future Education in Speech
                                Communication Sciences: 1 Analysis, SOCRATES/ERASMUS Programme
                            
                                Utrecht
                                OTS Publications
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    V.
                                    Hazan
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Holland
                                
                            
                            Proceedings of the ESCA/SOCRATES Tutorial and Research
                                Workshop on Method and Tool Innovations for Speech Science Education
                                (MATISSE), University College London, 16-17 April 1999.
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    Olaszy
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Olaszi
                                
                            
                            Hangidotartamok mesterséges változtatása periódusok
                                kivágásával, megismétlésével
                            [Manipulation of sound duration by cutting and
                                repetition of periods]
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Gósy
                                
                            
                            Beszédkutatás'98
                            
                                Budapest
                                MTA Nyelvtudományi Intézet
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
