


    
        
            
                Some Thoughts on Forty Years of Humanities Computing -
                    A Signpost to New Directions?
                
                    
                        Roy
                        Wisbey
                        
                            King's College London
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        invited paper
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The year 1960 marked the beginning of several strands of the speaker's
                    activities, strands which have remained fruitfully entwined until the present
                    day. In January 1960 he was appointed Honorary Secretary of the Modern
                    Humanities Research Association (MHRA), an influential learned society,
                    established in 1918, becoming its Honorary Treasurer in July 1963, a post he
                    held until March 2001. Following this he was elected as the Association's
                    President for 2003. Quite separately, and in a direction more obviously germane
                    to the present conference, he embarked in June 1960 on his first applications of
                    the computer to medieval literary texts, after a year or two of growing
                    awareness, above all through press reports concerning the work of Roberto Busa,
                    that scholarship had gained a powerful new tool for the compilation and analysis
                    of natural language. His first paper on the subject was presented in November
                    1960 to humanities scholars at the University of Cambridge, and published in
                        The Modern Language Review, an MHRA periodical, in
                    April 1962. Also in November 1960, he attended and contributed a paper to the
                    colloquium on the mechanization of literary analysis and lexicography organized
                    by the Tübingen Computing Centre in conjunction with IBM Germany and the Centre
                    (CAAL) which Pater (later Monsignor) Busa had established in 1956 at the
                    Aloisianum in Gallarate.
                Also in the autumn of 1960, the speaker had submitted proposals to the University
                    of Cambridge for what was eventually called the Literary and Linguistic Research
                    Centre, the doors of which opened in October 1964. Its work gave rise in March
                    1970 to an international symposium on 'The Computer in Literary and Linguistic
                    Research' (published C.U.P., 1971) the first of its kind in Great Britain, a
                    forerunner, and one of the progenitors of the present conference series. There
                    was a direct link between the symposium and the establishment in April 1973 of
                    the Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing. Its inaugural meeting at
                    King's College London was under the speaker's chairmanship, with Mrs Joan M.
                    Smith as founder Secretary. Within a few years the Association was fostering
                    international co-operation in humanities computing on a considerable scale. The
                    range of experience represented by these early developments offers an
                    opportunity to examine examples of how far the aims of projects undertaken
                    during this period had to be tailored to what was technologically possible at
                    the time, and the extent to which that generation's expectations for the future
                    were realistic, or fell short of what would actually be achieved. Another
                    question is how far subsequent research has been shaped by events which were not
                    foreseeable in 1960, for instance the present scale of access to personal
                    computing, together with its low cost, and the associated ubiquitousness of
                    e-mail and the web. In seeking new directions for humanities computing it is
                    sensible to reckon with some developments, such as the availability of
                    inconceivably large storage capacities, and the processor speed necessary to
                    harness them for every aspect of the worldwide electronic library. Among the
                    lessons the past can teach us, on the other hand, is the realisation that we
                    have little prospect of predicting future technologies, and the radical changes
                    they will bring about.
                In choosing illustrations from the present-day situation in humanities computing,
                    the speaker draws inter alia on experience he has
                    gained during the past decade, during which he has played a guiding role in
                    giving electronic access to the very large archive of MHRA periodicals,
                    bibliographies, monographs, and other book publications. This challenging task,
                    which finally and fully brought together various strands of his activities, as
                    outlined above, represented a striking blend of processes such as the
                    digitization, computer typesetting, and electronic storage of periodicals, which
                    it was possible to envisage in 1960, although hardly on the scale required, with
                    advanced features like mass accessibility for full text searching and article
                    delivery through the internet. Reference is made also to non-electronic
                    obstacles in the way of such undertakings, among them legal matters, for
                    instance intellectual property rights, and commercial considerations like
                    financial viability. Such concerns are of particular importance to learned
                    societies which, like the MHRA, see their charitable function as the provision
                    of a stable, long-term environment for core bibliographies and periodicals, as
                    well as the generation of funds for future initiatives, above all those which
                    cannot hope to be self-sustaining at the outset. Recent electronic developments
                    have ensured that the work of past contributors to MHRA publications is
                    revivified and that it remains current indefinitely, while helping to fund new
                    directions of scholarship.
            
        
    
