


    
        
            
                Computer Philology: 'Wissenschaft' or
                    'Hilfswissenschaft'?
                
                    
                        Jan
                        Christoph
                        Meister
                        
                            University of Hamburg
                            jan-c-meister@uni-hamburg.de
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                This paper discusses the problem of the theoretical-methodological status of
                    Humanities Computing (HC). More particularly it focuses on Computer Philology
                    (CP), i.e. the computational concepts and techniques dedicated to aspects of a
                    philological analysis of literary texts. The question guiding my deliberations
                    is whether CP is a proper ‘Wissenschaft’ in the sense of an emerging
                    fully-fledged discipline, or rather an ancillary discipline, a
                    ‘Hilfswissenschaft’ similar to Statistics or Library Science?
                One can safely say that the practice of HC has begun to establish itself as an
                    integral part of research and teaching in various disciplines in the Arts and
                    Humanities. But one must also concede that a consensus regarding the
                    methodological-theoretical calibre of our undertakings seems to have evaded us
                    thus far. As a result our own debate seems to retreat more and more onto the
                    safe ground of pragmatism and technology, or in other words: who cares about the
                    methodological and philosophical appraisal of HC - as long as it works?
                I believe that this is a dangerousely narrow focus - if nothing else, it is at
                    least strategically detrimental to the aim of furthering the
                    institutionalization of Humanities Computing (HC) at universities. The fact that
                    Computer Philology (CP) concerns a more narrowly defined and homogenous array of
                    disciplines than HC makes matters even worse. Any attempt to introduce CP vis à
                    vis the well defined philological disciplines only accentuates the problem of
                    the as yet vague methodological status of this ‘newcomer’.
                For example, at Hamburg University we recently (October 2001) managed to formally
                    institute a joint ‘Arbeitsgruppe Computerphilologie’ in the Faculties of
                    Computer Science and the Faculty of Languages. We are clear as to our brief:
                    introduce modularized course components in CP into the language and literature
                    curricula. Pragmatic considerations, such as, the aim to equip students with new
                    skills, as well as the current ‘sexyness’ of computer technology work in our
                    favor. But we are nevertheless divided as to the more profound philosophical and
                    methodological arguments on which to ‘sell’ this initiative to colleagues and
                    students. And or differences do indeed boil down to the very question: Is CP a
                    proper ‘Wissenschaft’ - or is it rather a ‘Hilfswissenschaft’?
                Proponents of the latter position hold that CP cannot be a true discipline as it
                    is neither defined by an exclusive subject matter, or a particular perspective
                    onto such matter, nor ─ and this would seem the more difficult verdict to
                    counter - has it as yet produced a new theory of literature, not to mention a
                    meta-theory reflecting its own axioms and practices. This, for example, is the
                    opinion of my colleagueWalther von Hahn who approaches the question from the
                    perspective of the Linguist and Computer Scientist. Von Hahn illustrates his
                    argument with the following process model:
                        Figure 1:
                    
                The positioning of the CP-block in the bottom left rectangle, and in particular
                    the orientation of the unilinear arrows in this diagramm clearly demonstrate an
                    hierarchical organisation: CP is primarily conceived of by von Hahn as a
                    research practice that is governed by the preceeding formulation of philological
                    desiderata. These desiderata are identified in the course of the inspection of
                    textual data (1) which leads to a formulation of specific research questions and
                    interests (2). Only then can the selection of particular CP-tools (= practices)
                    take place (3). These are now applied to the data (4) and generate a new
                    representation of the textual data which in turn are passed back to the
                    philologist (5) for their eventual interpretation. This interpretation then
                    feeds back into philological theory and methodology.
                I would now like to juxtapose the underlying hypothesis - e.g., CP as a
                    ‘Hilfswissenschaft’ - with conclusions drawn from my own research into computer
                    based analysis of narrated action, a 7-year project concluded in early 2001
                    (components of this project were presented at the ALLC conferences Paris 1994 /
                    Virginia 1999.)
                I initially set out to analyse the structural features of narrated action, with a
                    view to formulating a model of ‘minimal action structures’, that is, the least
                    complex yet logically coherent and context-idenpendent sequence of narrated
                    events. I had found that there was no hard and fast theory on what actually
                    constitutes a coherent piece of narrated action ─ the problem was either being
                    discussed in terms of the conditions for achieving narrative ‘closure’, or in an
                    altogether impressionistic and intuitive way. The only models and partial
                    definitions useful to me were those developed in Formalism and Structuralism,
                    schools of thought to whom the graphic respresentation of narrated action in the
                    form of tree-and-nodes diagrams is fairly common (and owed to generative models
                    imported from structural linguistics). Then I happened to stumble upon an
                    article by Alain Colmerauer which gave a brief description of the AI-language
                    PROLOG and illustrated it by way of a tree diagram. The visual analogy between
                    an action- and a PROLOG-tree pointed me to the conceptual analogy, and the
                    possibility to use a computer to model a minimal coherent action in a narrative,
                    i.e., an EPISODE in the logical sense.
                Up to this point my project had thus proceeded more or less along steps 1 to 3 of
                    van Hahn’s process model. The real problem ─ and challenge! ─ however was that
                    the two blocks in the bottom left box turned out to be - empty containers: there
                    was no developed theory or model dealing with my particular research problem
                    available in HC/CP; there were also no established practices to apply. The
                    bottom line was that I had to design and program a mark-up tool before I could
                    even begin to model action structures by running a combinatory PROLOG-algorithm
                    on the meta-data.
                In more abstract terms, I had found myself confronted with what I now regard as
                    the most important methodological principle to be elaborated upon in the
                    methodological-theoretical appraisal of CP. The type of questions considered
                    relevant in the philologies normally require a semantic mark-up of the ‘raw’
                    textual data; the mere digital representation of non-numeric data (unless it is
                    confined to a purely statistical distribution analysis) does not provide access
                    to semantic phenomena. However, the process of data mark-up, subsequent analysis
                    and modeling of meta-data, and eventual evaluation of the model in itself also
                    presupposes that the philologist has identified not just a philological, but
                    also a ‘computational’ frame of reference - in other words, the computer
                    philologist is not just picking tools from a box and applying these to old
                    questions. He or she must rather reconceptualize the research problem in a new
                    light before the tool’s aspect even comes into play.
                As for my own project, this is how I would therefore schematize its
                    methodological architecture:
                        Figure 2:
                    
                In comparing von Hahn’s to my own diagram I come to the following
                        conclusions:
                        The interdependency between the tools and practices of CP on the one
                            hand, and the textual data on the other involves a hidden ‘third party’
                            - a conceptual frame of reference novel to the philologies.
                        The two-step representational transformation from textual data to
                            meta-data, and then from meta-data to philological interpretation,
                            therefore cannot be thought of as governed exclusively by conceptual
                            models drawn from philological theory and methodology. The import of the
                            ‘foreign’ conceptual model informs the entire research architecture
                            throughout; it is as essential to the design of the transformational
                            processes as it is to the eventual interpretation of the transforms
                            generated.
                        The key intellectual prospect of the development and integration of CP
                            into the methodological ambit of the philologies proper is not the fact
                            that, because of deploying computer technology, one can in certain cases
                            analyze and model textual data faster, more coherently, or on the basis
                            of more explicit (and thus transparent) interpretive and/or cognitive
                            algorithms. What seems far more important is that we are offered new
                            frames of reference as to how to conceptualize and model text-based
                            phenomena.
                        Computer Philology undisputedly ‘has’ tools and practices - but it
                            ‘is’ more than these: neither a proper ‘Wissenschaft’, nor an
                            a-theroretical ‘Hilfswissenschaft’, its methodological status is that of
                            a new philological heuristics.
                    
                Part of the problem of how to adequately define the methodological status of HC
                    and CP might, in fact, stem from the tendency to confound two meanings of the
                    term ‘computer’. When we focus on tools and practices in CP we refer to the
                    machine ‘computer’ in a very literal sense - hence the pragmatists’ attempt to
                    define CP per se in this vein. But ‘computer’ is also a metaphor, like ‘book’ or
                    ‘image’, that stands for a particular mode and method of symbolic
                    representation. In the philologist’s case it is a metaphor for a very specific
                    reconceptualization of the phenomenon of ‘text based meaning’: one that aims at
                    bridging the gap between the qualifiable, and the quantifiable. Whether that
                    ‘metaphor’ is run on a Cray or on paper and pencil is not really the key
                    question.
            
        
    
