


    
        
            
                Internet Assistant
                
                    
                        Miklós
                        Péter
                        Balogh
                        
                            
                            baloghmp@delfin.klte.hu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                By the expansion of Internet, more and more problems are solved by using the
                    computer. During these operations we navigate the Net using qvasi only visual
                    and written informations. This tendency is likely to change nowadays; the
                    occurance of pages including complete multimedial applications are more
                    frequent. So we can say, that the Internet is ready for audio-visual contact.
                    Our application is based on this fact. The main idea is, making an animation
                    from a synthetized voice and from a faceimage. Faceimages are prerecorded
                    images. Every faceimage is typical of a set of voices. For this method we can
                    reduce the number of images by classifiing the voices. A set of voices is
                    associated with a faceimage. So a couple of dozen faceimages are enough for the
                    application. The synthetized voice uses the "voiceengine" provided by the actual
                    computer (for example: IBM ViaVoice). To every voice in the voicestream we
                    corresponde a suitable faceimage. The synchronisation of these two
                    precesses(changing images, synthetizing) gives a video-like effect. The amin
                    point of this application is to accentuate special informations by reaching the
                    audiance via two channels, which is more effective than using single one. The
                    system is based completly on Java technology, which makes the application
                    compatible on any plattforms. The application works an all hardware
                    specifications and operating systems where Java Virtual Machine is provided
                    without any change.
            
        
    
