


    
        
            
                MITH's Lean, Mean Versioning Machine
                
                    
                        Martha
                        Nell
                        Smith
                        
                            Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities
                                (MITH)
                            Martha.Nell.Smith@umail.umd.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Susan
                        Schreibman
                        
                            Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities
                                (MITH)
                            Susan.Schreibman@umail.umd.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Amit
                        Kumar
                        
                            Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities
                                (MITH)
                            amit@ccs.uky.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Lara
                        Vetter
                        
                            Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities
                                (MITH)
                            lv26@umail.umd.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jarom
                        McDonald
                        
                            Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities
                                (MITH)
                            jmcdon@glue.umd.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Edward
                        Vanhoutte
                        
                            Centrum voor Teksteditie en Bronnenstudie,
                            Belgium evanhoutte@kantl.be
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    The presentation of multiple witnesses continues to be a formidable challenge
                        to both editing and publishing electronic texts. At the core of the theories
                        of such computer editions and computer assisted editions is the requirement
                        for a platform independent and non-proprietary markup language which can
                        deal with the linguistic and the bibliographic text of a work and which can
                        guarantee maximal accessibility, longevity and intellectual integrity in the
                        encoding of texts and textual variation. The encoding schemes proposed by
                        the TEI Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange have
                        generally been accepted as the most promising solution to this. The
                        transcription of primary source material enables automatic collation, stemma
                        (re)construction, the creation of (cumulative) indexes and concordances etc.
                        by the computer. With all of these advances, however, scholars have been
                        required either to rely on expensive commercial software such as DynaWeb or
                        to develop their own solutions (via major grant and institutional support)
                        to deliver and successfully display multiple witnesses. Thus scholars who
                        work in institutions that cannot afford to purchase or develop such tools
                        have no way to deliver richly encoded multiple versions of texts and have
                        therefore had their work impeded.
                    The Versioning Machine being developed at MITH is an open-source software
                        tool that will be freely distributed to individuals and not-for-profit
                        organizations under general public license to display deeply-encoded,
                        multiple versions of texts. To use this tool, scholars and students will
                        encode texts in XML (which must be well-formed, but will not necessarily
                        require a DTD), which will then be displayed through a browser plug in. The
                        tool will not only display multiple versions of text, but scholarly
                        apparatus appropriate to the version of the text being displayed. In
                        addition, the system would keep track of apparatus already read by users
                        (for example, a JavaScript routine would mark unread and read comments in
                        different colors) so that users would not waste time reading previously read
                        annotation. The papers featured in this session will, therefore, first
                        describe the versioning machine’s development, and then will show, via
                        specific projects, its value through diverse usages.
                
                
                    
                        MITH’s Lean, Mean Versioning Machine
                        Susan Schreibman
                        Amit Kumar
                        
                            Peter Robinson’s 1996 article, “Is There a Text in These Variants”
                                lucidly sets out the challenge of editing texts with multiple
                                witnesses in an electronic environment. The article raises questions
                                about texts and textuality exploring where “The Text” resides: is it
                                to be found “in all the editions and printings: in all the various
                                forms the text, any text, may take” (99), or is it in the imperfect
                                transmission of the text over time. His thesis, “to consider how the
                                new possibilities opened up by computer representation offer new
                                ways of seeing all the various forms of any text - and, with these,
                                the text beneath, within, or above all these various forms” (99) is
                                a challenge that the current generation of electronic editions has
                                not fully realized.
                            Projects like Robinson’s own Hengwrt Chaucer
                                    Digital Facsimile and The Blake
                                    Archive, are two electronic scholarly editions which are
                                excellent examples of projects that do not edit “from one distance
                                and from one distance alone” (Robinson 107), but explore the text
                                that emerges both in and between the variants, both in the text’s
                                linguistic and bibliographic codes.
                            Both these projects, however, utilize expensive software systems to
                                publish their editions. In the case of The Hengwrt Chaucer Digital
                                Facsimile, Robinson’s own publishing system, Anastasia: Analytical System Tools and SGML/XML Integration
                                    Applications(&lt;&gt;), is utilized. In the case of The Blake Archive, Dynaweb() is used. Both these publication tools, in addition to being
                                expensive, require, in the case of Anastasia, some knowledge of programming to, in the case of
                                    Dynaweb, a full-time programmer to
                                support the product.
                            The Versioning Machine that Amit Kumar and Susan Schreibman are
                                developing is an open-source tool that will be freely distributed to
                                individuals and not-for-profit organizations under general public
                                license to display XML encoded text which is both deeply-encoded and
                                which exists in multiple witnesses. A prototype of this tool,
                                developed by Jose Chua and Susan Schreibman, was presented as a
                                poster session at last year’s ACH/ALLC in New York . The present
                                project will build upon Chua and Schreibman’s work to create a more
                                robust tool which more fully addresses the various problems, both of
                                encoding multiple witnesses and displaying them.
                            The tool will also display scholarly apparatus appropriate to the
                                version of the text being displayed. Since the same comment may be
                                displayed across several versions, readers will need visual clues to
                                know if a particular comment was previously read. However,
                                persistence is not a goal of XML or XSL. The solution might lay in a
                                server-side application with the aid of client-side application
                                logic.
                            The first time user of the facility will be asked to register under a
                                name and password, so that the presentation layer is able to
                                customize view as per users interest. Session Tracking provided by
                                Java Servlets API will be used to track the users, and the different
                                witnesses along with their annotation will be stored in the server
                                side database. The server side database will be either an
                                Object-Oriented database or better still a XML Database. The
                                deletion, addition and transposition of the variation (which could
                                be word or punctuation), will be cued in the presentation, which
                                will create the impression of cohesion in the different versions.
                            The simplest solution would be to give each comment an identification
                                number. The Session tracker and the persistence database on the
                                server would keep track of which comments were already read and the
                                application logic could then take appropriate action. To give a more
                                concrete example, if an XSLT document transformed an XML document
                                into HTML, a JavaScript routine could mark unread and read comments
                                in different colors.
                            Another particularly challenging editorial issue has been the
                                representation of the intra-textual writing process. When working
                                with a particular manuscript draft, an editor may make an educated
                                guess as to when additions, deletions and emendations were made on a
                                particular manuscript draft (based on handwriting, ink colour, the
                                logic of the sentences, etc). Indeed, one of the beauties of
                                publishing facsimile editions of manuscripts is that no editorial
                                statement need be made in this regard - it is left up the reader to
                                decide on the writing process based on an examination of the
                                evidence. Of course, this textual ambiguity can be replicated in the
                                digital environment by publishing scanned versions of text.
                                Unfortunately, however, encoded texts allow no such ambiguity.
                                Representing the intra-textual revision process in an encoded
                                edition is a particularly interesting and challenging problem. In
                                these cases, relative ordering may alleviate the encoding process.
                                We are experimenting with assigning ordering comparative
                                identifications in XML, regardless of the exact revision time
                                relative to other emendations. In the case where two or more
                                revisions cannot be ordered, they are assigned the same ordering
                                identification. It is then up to the presentation logic to determine
                                how to display it.
                            Syd Bauman of The Scholarly Technology
                                Group at Brown University will be collaborating with Kumar
                                and Schreibman in developing a free tool to assist authors in
                                creating and editing multiple witnesses of texts. Most people used
                                to TEI encoding can follow the following marked up text without
                                difficulty:
                                &lt;p&gt;Space, the final frontier. These are the voyages
                                    of the  starship Enterprise. Its
                                    &lt;app&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="tos"&gt;five-year&lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="tng"&gt;ongoing&lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;/app&gt;
                                    mission: to explore strange new worlds; to seek 
                                    out new life and  new civilizations; to boldly go 
                                    where no
                                    &lt;app&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="tos"&gt;man&lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="tng"&gt;one&lt;/rdg&gt;   
                                    &lt;/app&gt;
                                    has gone before.&lt;/p&gt; 
                            
                            Although even this simple example is a bit difficult to follow
                                without the helpful whitespace. But even using only a relatively
                                simple subset of TEI markup (not using, for example,
                                &lt;lem&gt;, type=,cause=, hand=, or resp=, nor any markup
                                to indicate certainty; and using &lt;witDetail&gt; merely
                                for citation of the source), it is much harder to read a document
                                with 12 witnesses. Even the following example, only a few short
                                lines of a four witness set is challenging to follow:
                                &lt;TEI.2&gt;
                                    &lt;teiHeader&gt;
                                    &lt;!-- &lt;fileDesc&gt; removed --&gt;
                                    &lt;encodingDesc&gt;
                                    &lt;!-- &lt;samplingDecl&gt; removed --&gt;
                                    &lt;variantEncoding
                                    method="parallel-segmentation" location="internal"/&gt;
                                    &lt;p&gt;In each encoded APP all witnesses are explicitly mentioned in
                                    the wit= attribute of one of the RDG elements.&lt;/p&gt;
                                    &lt;/encodingDesc&gt;
                                    &lt;/teiHeader&gt;
                                    &lt;text&gt;
                                    &lt;body&gt;
                                    &lt;p&gt;Space&lt;app&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="STtos2 STtos4 STtos ST2twok2 ST2twok3 STtng1
                                    STtng2 STtng3 STtng4"&gt;, &lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="STtos1"&gt;: &lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="STtos3 ST2twok1"&gt;&amp;hellip;&lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;/app&gt;&lt;app&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="STtos1 STtos2 STtos3 STtos4 STtos5 ST2twok1 ST2twok2
                                    ST2twok3 STtng2 STtng3 STtng4"&gt;t&lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="STtng1"&gt;T&lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;/app&gt;he
                                    &lt;app&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="STtos1 STtos2 STtos3 STtos4 STtos5 ST2twok1 ST2twok2
                                    ST2twok3 STtng1 STtng3 STtng4"&gt;final&lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="STtng2"&gt;&lt;emph rend="slant(italic)"&gt;final&lt;/emph&gt;&lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;/app&gt;
                                    frontier&lt;app&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="STtos1 STtos2 STtos3 STtos4 STtos5 ST2twok1 ST2twok2
                                    STtng1 STtng2 STtng3 STtng4"&gt;.&lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;rdg wit="ST2twok3"&gt;&amp;hellip;&lt;/rdg&gt;
                                    &lt;/app&gt; . . .
                                    &lt;/witList&gt;
                                    &lt;/body&gt;
                                    &lt;/text&gt;
                                    &lt;/TEI.2&gt; 
                            If reading such instances is extremely difficult, editing them is
                                even more challenging (but could certainly be done almost completely
                                automatically, if the individual witnesses have already been
                                separately captured). Just keeping track of a single phrase across
                                multiple witnesses is demanding for the textual scholar. The tool
                                that Syd Bauman is proposing is one which would selectively hide the
                                markup pertaining directly to all but the witnesses currently being
                                studied, but left the rest of the markup and all the content visible
                                for editing.
                            Bauman believes that it should not be impossible for a developer of
                                an XML editor to implement these features -- any such editor already
                                selectively hides markup from other than the selected namespaces.
                                The only part that need be changed is the code for deciding which
                                markup is to be hidden and which is to be displayed.
                            This, however, raises the obvious problem of how to handle a request
                                by the user for additional markup which would overlap hidden markup
                                in a non-well-formed manner. Ideally TEI-aware software would, at
                                user option, automatically use one of the TEI mechanisms (e.g.,
                                part= if available on particular element in question, next= and
                                prev=, or &lt;join&gt;). Far easier to implement, of course,
                                would be to issue an error message. But again, the same basic
                                problem exists for selective display of markup based on namespaces
                                instead of witnesses.
                            The Versioning Machine, therefore, will
                                be both an editing and display tool to help textual scholars edit
                                and display multiple witnesses of deeply encoded text.
                        
                    
                    
                        References
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Peter
                                            Robinson
                                        
                                    
                                    Is There a Text in These Variants
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Richard
                                            J.
                                            Finneran
                                        
                                    
                                    The Literary Text in the Digital Age.
                                    
                                        Ann Arbor
                                        University of Michigan Press
                                        1996. rpt. 1999
                                        99-116
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Witnessing Dickinson’s Witnesses
                        Lara Vetter
                        Jarom McDonald
                        
                            Emily Dickinson’s writings resist the technology of print. In fact,
                                all of her writings need to be reimagined outside the print
                                translations that have seen the literary forms of her writerly work
                                as entities that fit comfortably into the genres designated by
                                previous editors and that conform to nineteenth-century notions of
                                what constitutes the poetic and epistolary text. Not only do
                                Dickinson’s verse productions defy conventions of lineation and text
                                division, punctuation and capitalization, but they perform
                                graphically and visually as she playfully reinvents the poem as a
                                living, generative textual body, infused with movement. It is this
                                feature of her writing that evokes Marta Werner’s call for
                                “unediting” Dickinson’s writings, for “constellating these works not
                                as still points of meaning or as incorruptible texts but, rather, as
                                events and phenomena of freedom.” To do so, or to “undo” so,
                                requires that readers unedit a century’s critical receptions to
                                recuperate a sense of the material documents as Emily Dickinson
                                herself left them. By offering full-color digital reproductions of
                                Dickinson’s holographs, the editors of the Dickinson Electronic
                                Archives have been working toward this goal of unediting; textual
                                transcription and encoding, however, is another matter. Representing
                                Dickinson’s compositions, astonishingly energetic and ambitious
                                creative endeavors not bound to and by the book and print
                                technology’s presentation of literature, presents unique challenges
                                to the textual editor struggling to remain within the bounds of the
                                TEI.
                            One of the major obstacles in encoding Dickinson’s literary creations
                                is the vast number of textual variants and versions that are found
                                amidst the thousands of extant manuscripts. Much of what people
                                recognize as the corpora of Dickinson’s “poetry” exists in
                                collections of manuscripts, or “fascicles,” bound by Dickinson
                                herself, which served as both a form of publication and preservation
                                as well as a repository for copy texts used when disseminating her
                                verse to her almost 100 correspondents. Working alone, and in
                                collaboration with correspondents, Dickinson began to conceive of a
                                model of the poem as fundamentally open and unstable, scripting
                                compositions that evoke a multiplicity of readings through alternate
                                versions and intratextual and subtextual variants.
                            Editorially, then, the project of encoding Emily Dickinson’s
                                manuscripts presents us with three types of variant or versioning
                                issues, each with its own unique challenges in markup and display:
                            Intratextual and subtextual variant words, phrases, and lines. In
                                both draft and “finished” compositions, Dickinson frequently
                                supplies multiple alternate words, phrases, and lines. Dickinson
                                does not appear to privilege one reading over another; additionally,
                                she does not always make clear how and where subtextual variants
                                might operate in the text. Our encoding practice must mimic these
                                facets of her writing by maintaining the integrity of the visual
                                layout of the manuscript while still linking variants to possible,
                                sometimes multiple, locations of substitution through the precision
                                of the double-end-point methodology.
                            Intratextual and extratextual variant line groups. Within letters or
                                a series of letters, Dickinson may offer different final stanzas for
                                an existing initial stanza, often in response to a collaborative
                                compositional process with her correspondent. Our practice must
                                recognize both the multiple suggested incarnations of the poem as
                                well as the chronological progression by which the iterations
                                evolved.
                            Multiple versions. Dickinson often sends the same poem, in identical
                                or variant form, to multiple correspondents. By encoding each
                                manuscript separately and constructing constellations of linking
                                between them, we acknowledge that each version possesses its own
                                context and genealogy while bearing some significant relationship to
                                its textual cousins; this practice also resists the notion that any
                                one version is privileged over another.
                            Faced with the instability of the Dickinson text, historical editors
                                have made difficult, individual choices in printing her poems as
                                singular entities, by choosing definitively a given word or phrase
                                among the many that she offers and ignoring the rest, or by
                                producing a “final” poem with a collection of “subset” readings
                                beneath it; invariably, intratextual variants, if represented at
                                all, are printed beneath the poem transcription. Hence, we must not
                                only reflect Dickinson’s multiplicity in textual markup, but in
                                final display. For example, one Dickinson manuscript offers 12
                                different word and phrasal intralinear and subtextual variants.
                                Rather than offering a hierarchical, top-down display of the text in
                                which the variants are viewed by a user as footnotes or
                                afterthoughts, we must utilize an environment that recognizes the
                                expansive nature of this strategy for poetic creation; this is not
                                one poem with 12 different variants, but, potentially, 144 different
                                poems. While there is only one encoded file for a given manuscript,
                                the technology allows us to write scripts that would recognize the
                                internal variants and allow the user to manipulate the result -- it
                                could be as rudimentary as multiple, client-moveable layers or as
                                complex as creating a dynamic relational database from the initial
                                document which plays out all 144 possibilities. With this approach,
                                we can de-hierarchize the various instantiations in all of their
                                visual and theoretical complexities, allowing the reader to
                                experience the textual creation in a spirit of “unediting” rather
                                than in a spirit of traditional print translation.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Putting Time back in Manuscripts: Textual Study and Text Encoding,
                            with Examples from Modern Manuscripts
                        Edward Vanhoutte
                        
                            It’s interesting to observe how many theorists of electronic
                                scholarly editing have advocated the transition from universional
                                editions in print to universal electronic editions which can in
                                theory hold all versions of a work (Dahlström 2000), but have
                                passed over the practicalities underlying the production of such an
                                edition. The envisioned model of the versioning edition,
                                representing multiple texts (Reiman 1987) in facsimile as well as in
                                machine-readable form, in concordances, stemmata, lists of variants,
                                etc. has already been applied to editions of older literature and
                                medieval texts (e.g. Robinson 1996, Solopova 2000), and more
                                interesting work in several fields is currently under way (e.g.
                                Parker 2000). At the core of the theories of such computer editions
                                and computer assisted editions (e.g. Gants 1994, McGann 1996, and
                                Shillingsburg 1996) is the requirement for a platform independent
                                and non-proprietary markup language which can deal with the
                                linguistic and the bibliographic text of a work and which can
                                guarantee maximal accessibility, longevity and intellectual
                                integrity (Sperberg-McQueen, 1994 &amp; 1996: 41) in the
                                encoding of texts and textual variation. The encoding schemes
                                proposed by the TEI Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
                                Interchange (Sperberg-McQueen &amp; Burnard 1994) have generally
                                been accepted as the most promising solution to this. The
                                transcription of primary source material enables automatic
                                collation, stemma (re)construction, the creation of (cumulative)
                                indexes and concordances etc. by the computer.
                            Although the TEI subsets for the transcription of primary source
                                material "have not proved entirely satisfactorily" for a number of
                                problems (Driscoll 2000), they do provide an extremely rich set of
                                mechanisms for the encoding of medieval manuscripts and documents
                                with a fairly "neat", static, and stable appearance such as print
                                editions. The real problems arise when dealing with modern
                                manuscript material.Whereas medieval manuscripts form part of the
                                transmission history of a text, evidence of which is given by
                                several successive witnesses, and which show the working (copying)
                                process of a scribe and the transmission/distribution of a
                                work/text, modern manuscripts are manuscripts "qui font partie d'une
                                genèse textuelle attestée par plusieurs témoins successifs et qui
                                manifestent le travail d'écriture d'un auteur" (Grésillon 1994:
                                manuscripts which form part of the genesis of a text, evidence of
                                which is given by several successive witnesses, and which show the
                                writing process of an author). The french school of Critique
                                Génétique primarily deals with modern manuscripts and their
                                primary aim is to study the avant-texte, not so much as the basis to
                                set out editorial principles for textual representation, but as a
                                means to understand the genesis of the literary work or as Daniel
                                Ferrer puts it: "it does not aim to reconstitute the optimal text of
                                a work; rather, it aims to reconstitute the writing process which
                                resulted in the work, based on surviving traces, which are primarily
                                author's draft manuscripts" (Ferrer 1995, 143).
                            The application of hypertext technology and the possibility to
                                display digital facsimiles in establishing electronic dossiers
                                génétiques, let the editor regroup a series of documents which are
                                akin to each other on the basis of resemblance or difference in
                                multiple ways, but the experiments with proprietary software systems
                                (Hypercard, Toolbook, Macromedia, PDF, etc.) are too much oriented
                                towards display, and often don't comply with the rule of "no
                                digitization without transcription" (Robinson 1997).Further, the TEI
                                solutions for the transcription of primary source material do not
                                cater for modern manuscripts because the current (P4) and previous
                                versions of the TEI have never addressed the encoding of the time
                                factor in text. Since a writing process by definition takes place in
                                time, four central complications may arise in connection with modern
                                manuscripts and should thus be catered for in en encoding scheme for
                                the transcription of modern primary source material. The
                                complications are the following:
                                    Its beginning and end may be hard to determine and its
                                        internal composition difficult to define (document structure
                                        vs. unit of writing): authors frequently interrupt writing,
                                        leave sentences unfinished and so on.
                                    Manuscripts frequently contain items such as scriptorial
                                        pauzes which have immense importance in the analysis of the
                                        genesis of a text.
                                    Even non-verbal elements such as sketches, drawings, or
                                        doodles may be regarded as forming a component of the
                                        writing process for some analytical purposes.
                                    Below the level of the chronological act of writing,
                                        manuscripts may be segmented into units defined by thematic,
                                        syntactic, stylistic, etc. phenomena; no clear agreement
                                        exists, however, even as to the appropriate names for such
                                        segments.
                                
                            These four complications are exactly the ones the TEI Guidelines cite
                                when trying to define the complexity of speech, emphasizing that
                                "Unlike a written text, a speech event takes place in time."
                                (Sperberg-McQueen and Burnard 2001, 254). This may suggest that the
                                markup solutions employed in the transcription of speech could prove
                                useful for the transcription of modern manuscripts, in particular
                                the chapter in the TEI Guidelines on Linking, Segmentation, and
                                Alignment (esp. 14.5. Synchronization).Building on this assumption,
                                this paper will address the relationship between theory of texts and
                                the design of electronic markup, and will be illustrated with
                                examples from four projects I am currently involved in at the
                                Centrum voor Teksteditie en Bronnenstudie&lt;&gt; (Centre for
                                Scholarly Editing and Document Studies): The transcription of the
                                Finnegan's Wake notebooks by James Joyce, the electronic edition of
                                the diaries of Daniel Robberechts, a genetic edition of a manuscript
                                by Willem Elsschot, and the transcription of all of the extant
                                witnesses of a novel by Stijn Streuvels. This paper will revisit
                                Michael Sperberg-McQueen's "Text in the Electronic Age: Textual
                                Study and Text Encoding, with Examples from Medieval Texts."
                                (Sperberg-McQueen, 1991) and will define a research agenda for the
                                new TEI Working group on the transcription of modern
                            manuscripts.
                        
                    
                    
                        References
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Mats
                                            Dahlström
                                        
                                    
                                    Digital Incunables: Versionality and
                                        Versatility in Digital Scholarly Editions
                                
                                
                                    Paper.
                                    ICCC/IFIP Third Conference on Electronic
                                        Publishing 2000, Kaliningrad/Svetlogorsk (Russia):
                                        Kaliningrad State University, 17th-19th August 2000.
                                        Accessed on November 29, 2001
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        2000
                                    
                                
                                Accessed on November 29, 2001. &lt;&gt;
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            M.
                                            J.
                                            Driscoll
                                        
                                    
                                    Encoding Old Norse/Icelandic Primary Sources
                                        using TEI-Conformant SGML
                                
                                
                                    Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                                    
                                        15
                                        1
                                        81-91
                                        2000
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Daniel
                                            Ferrer
                                        
                                    
                                    Hypertextual Representation of Literary Working
                                        Papers
                                
                                
                                    Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                                    
                                        10
                                        2
                                        143-145
                                        1995
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            David
                                            Gants
                                        
                                    
                                    Toward a Rationale of Electronic Textual
                                        Criticism
                                
                                
                                    Paper.
                                    ALLC/ACH Conference, Paris, 19 april
                                        1994. Accessed on November 29, 2001
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        1994
                                    
                                
                                Accessed on November 29, 2001. &lt;&gt;
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Almuth
                                            Grésillon
                                        
                                    
                                    Eléments de critique génétique. Lire les
                                        manuscrits modernes
                                    
                                        Paris
                                        Presses Universitaires de Paris
                                        1994
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Jerome
                                            McGann
                                        
                                    
                                    The Rationale of HyperText
                                
                                
                                    TEXT
                                    
                                        9
                                        
                                        
                                        11-32
                                        1996
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            D.
                                            C.
                                            Parker
                                        
                                    
                                    The Text of the New Testament and Computers:
                                        the International Greek New Testament Project
                                
                                
                                    Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                                    
                                        15
                                        1
                                        27-41
                                        2000
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Donald
                                            H.
                                            Reiman
                                        
                                    
                                    Chapter 10:
                                    'Versioning': The Presentation of Multiple
                                        Texts
                                
                                
                                    Romantic Texts and Contexts
                                    
                                        Columbia
                                        University of Missouri Press
                                        1987
                                        167-180
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            P.
                                            M.
                                            W.
                                            Robinson
                                        
                                    
                                    The Wife of Bath's Prologue on CD-ROM
                                    
                                        Cambridge
                                        Cambridge University Press
                                        1996
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Peter
                                            M.
                                            W.
                                            Robinson
                                        
                                    
                                    New Directions in Critical Editing
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Kathryn
                                            Sutherland
                                        
                                    
                                    Electronic Text. Investigations in Method and
                                        Theory
                                    
                                        Oxford
                                        Clarendon Press
                                        1997
                                        145-171
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Peter
                                            Shillingsburg
                                        
                                    
                                    Principles for Electronic Archives, Scholarly
                                        Editions, and Tutorials
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Richard
                                            J.
                                            Finneran
                                        
                                    
                                    The Literary Text in the Digital Age
                                    
                                        Ann Arbor
                                        The University of Michigan Press
                                        1996
                                        23-35
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            E.
                                            Solopova
                                        
                                    
                                    The General Prologue of The Canterbury Tales on
                                        CD-ROM
                                    
                                        Cambridge
                                        Cambridge University Press
                                        2000
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            C.
                                            M.
                                            Sperberg-McQueen
                                        
                                    
                                    Text in the Electronic Age: Textual Study and
                                        Text Encoding, with Examples from Medieval Texts
                                
                                
                                    Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                                    
                                        6
                                        1
                                        34-46
                                        1991
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            C.
                                            M.
                                            Sperberg-McQueen
                                        
                                    
                                    Textual Criticism and the Text Encoding
                                        Initiative
                                
                                
                                    Paper presented at MLA '94, San Diego
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        1994
                                    
                                
                                Accessed on November 29, 2001. &lt;&gt;.
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            C.
                                            M.
                                            Sperberg-McQueen
                                        
                                    
                                    Textual Criticism and the Text Encoding
                                        Initiative
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Richard
                                            J.
                                            Finneran
                                        
                                    
                                    The Literary Text in the Digital Age
                                    
                                        Ann Arbor
                                        The University of Michigan Press
                                        1996
                                        37-61
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            C.
                                            M.
                                            Sperberg-McQueen
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Lou
                                            Burnard
                                        
                                    
                                    Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
                                        Interchange. (TEI P3)
                                    
                                        Chicago and Oxford
                                        Text Encoding Initiative
                                        1994
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            C.
                                            M.
                                            Sperberg-McQueen
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Lou
                                            Burnard
                                        
                                    
                                    TEI P4 Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding
                                        and Interchange
                                    XML-compatible edition
                                    
                                        Oxford, Providence, Charlottesville, and Bergen
                                        The TEI Consortium
                                        2001
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
