


    
        
            
                Prognostics of English Verb Paradigm Evolution
                
                    
                        Maria
                        Glushko
                        
                            Voronezh State University, Russia 
                            maria_glushko@hotmail.com
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Strong verbs are disappearing from English,
                                    extrapolation points to c.3000 AD as the likely date of almost
                                    complete disappearance.
                            
                            
                                Whatmough (1956)
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    1. Introduction.
                    There exists in linguistics a traditionally sceptic view on the possibility
                        of forecasting the further development of the language. Few isolated
                        attempts were made in this respect, primarily in phonetics and morphology by
                        Polivanov (1957, 1991), Shevoroshkin (1973), Whatmough (1956). The main
                        objectives and methodology of linguistic prognostics were formulated by
                        Kretov (1992,1993).
                
                
                    2. A brief overview of linguistic prognostics at its present stage of
                        development.
                    Linguistic prognostics employs approaches traditionally used in lexicology,
                        lexicostatistics, mathematic linguistics, linguistic synergetics and corpus
                        linguistics.
                    Kretov (1993) divides linguistic prognostics into three major subfields:
                            ontognostics, i.e. explication of the
                                unobserved fragments of the language system at its present
                                stage;
                            futurognostics, i.e. extrapolation of
                                the revealed tendencies of the development of the system into
                                future;
                            retrognostics, i.e. reconstruction of
                                the past stages of the system.
                        
                    Both semiotic and functional approaches are employed by linguistic
                        prognostics. Semiotic approach allows to reveal theoretically semantic and
                        grammatical peculiarities of linguistic units. Here I can mention works by
                        Karpilovska (1990), Otsaluk (1993), Palmaitis and Toporov (1984). This
                        approach has been the most productive so far.
                    Less widespread is the functional approach to the language, which allows to
                        trace the dynamics of the functioning of linguistic units and then making
                        conclusions about the future development of the language system. I employed
                        functional approach in my work.
                
                
                    3. A hypothesis.
                    The general hypothesis for the research is based on the language law
                        discovered and described by G.K. Zipf (1935). It states that among the most
                        frequent words the percentage of old ones is far higher then that of rare or
                        infrequently used words. Yet, the inverse relationship is also true: the
                        more frequently used the word is, the better are its chances to remain
                        unchanged in the language vocabulary, the more stable it is.
                        Correspondingly, the less frequent word is, the fewer chances it has to
                        remain unchanged in the vocabulary.
                    Applying this law to irregular verbs, it has been proposed that irregularity
                        of past simple and past participle verb forms is caused with the high
                        frequency of the verb occurrence. It has also been assumed that the
                        reduction of functional load on the verb leads to its transferring from the
                        category of irregular to the category of regular verbs.
                
                
                    4. Corpus.
                    Chronological limits of the period considered are from 1500 until 1998. The
                        corpora of research is comprised with 140 books, i.e. appr. 8 mnl words. A
                        choice of texts and constraints imposed will be explained.
                
                
                    5. Sample group.
                    I studied the dynamics of the functional load on 90 verbs including all their
                        forms. These were:
                            30 regular verbs;
                            30 irregular verbs;
                            30 verbs possessing both regular and irregular conjurgation
                                forms.
                        
                    The choice of verbs picked for the sample group will be grounded with graphs
                        and tables.
                
                
                    6. Labour saving measures and methodologies.
                    I made use of the text analyzing program created in Delphi, which provided me
                        with relative frequencies of the units (i.e. the number of occurrences in
                        the text divided by the number of words in the text), as well as Mathematica
                        4.1 application for graphic representations and processing of the
                        results.
                
                
                    7. Tracing the dynamics.
                    The dynamics of relative frequency evolution has been studied for each of 90
                        verbs from the sample group. Afterwards, I divided all frequency of
                        occurrence data into three classes and summed figures, that referred to each
                        year. On receiving graphic representation of dynamics, three linear trends
                        were built, that represent maximally generalized tendencies of evolution of
                        verb classes we are interested in.
                
                
                    8. Conclusion or VS Whatmough.
                    Unfortunately neither linguistic prognostics has an apparatus in its disposal
                        that would allow extrapolating to c.3000 AD, nor Whatmough provides any
                        grounds for the statement mentioned above. I will show how English verb
                        paradigm will look in a century and prove that not only irregular verb class
                        doesn't disappear, but also the functional load on it increases.
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    A.
                                    Karpilovska
                                
                            
                            Konstruvannya skladnih slovotvorcheskih edinits
                            
                                Kiiv
                                Naukova dumka
                                1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            A.
                                A.Kretov
                            Nauchnii prognoz v leksicheskoi semantike
                        
                        
                             Funktsionalnaya semantika slova
                            
                                Sverdlovsk
                                
                                1992
                                99-110
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    A.
                                    Kretov
                                
                            
                            Osnovi leksiko-semanticheskoi prognostiki
                        
                        
                            Dissertatsia na soiskanie uchenoi stepeni doktora
                                filologicheskih nauk
                            
                                Voronezh
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            S.
                                I.Otsaluk
                            Prognozuvannya semantichnoi derivatsii: postanovka problemi
                        
                        
                            Materiali mezhdunarodnoi naukovoi konferentsii "Semantika movi tekstu"
                            
                                Ivano-Frankivsk
                                
                                1993
                                231-232
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            M.
                                L.Palmaitis
                            V.
                                N.Toporov
                            Ot rekonstruktsii 
                                staroprusskogo do rekriatsii novoprusskogo
                        
                        
                            Balto-slavyanskie issledovaniya
                            
                                Moskva
                                Nauka
                                
                                36-63
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            E.
                                D.Polivanov
                            Foneticheskie konvergentsii
                        
                        
                            Voprosi yazikoznaniya
                            
                                3
                                
                                77-83
                                1957
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            V.
                                V.Shevoroshkin
                            Distributivnaya fonetika russkogo yazika v sravnitel'no tipologicheskom aspekte
                        
                        
                            Problemi strukturnoi lingvistiki
                            
                                Moskva
                                Nauka
                                1973
                                575-585
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Whatmough
                                
                            
                            Language. A modern Synthesis
                            
                                London
                                Secher and Warburg
                                1956
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    K.
                                     Zipf
                                
                            
                            The Psycho-Biology of Language
                            
                                Cambridge, Mass.
                                
                                1935
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
