


    
        
            
                The Scottish Corpus of Texts and Speech: problems of
                    corpus design
                
                    
                        Fiona
                        Douglas
                        
                            University of Glasgow
                            F.Douglas@englang.arts.gla.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                In recent years the use of large corpora has revolutionised the way we study
                    language. There are now numerous well established corpus projects which have set
                    the standard for future corpus based research. As more and more corpora are
                    developed and technology continues to offer greater and greater scope, the
                    emphasis has shifted from corpus size to establishing norms of good practice.
                    There is also an increasingly critical appreciation of the crucial role played
                    by corpus design. Corpus design can, however, present peculiar problems for
                    particular types of source material, and the development of the Scottish Corpus
                    of Texts and Speech illustrates the problems which may be encountered when
                    dealing with a complicated linguistic situation such as exists in Scotland.
                The Scottish Corpus of Texts and Speech is the first large-scale corpus project
                    specifically dedicated to the languages of Scotland, and therefore it faces many
                    unanswered questions, such as those outlined below, which will have a direct
                    impact on the corpus design. The project is a joint venture by the Department of
                    English Language and STELLA project at the University of Glasgow, and the
                    Language Technology Group at the University of Edinburgh, and is funded by the
                    Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. The project seeks to address
                    the current gap in knowledge about the languages of Scotland by building a
                    publicly available electronic corpus of written and spoken texts mounted on the
                    Internet. The linguistic situation in Scotland is complex, with Scottish
                    English, Scots, Gaelic and numerous non-indigenous community languages all
                    playing a role. However, surprisingly little reliable information is available
                    on a variety of issues such as the survival of Scots, the distinguishing
                    characteristics of Scottish English, the use of non-indigenous languages, or the
                    way they have developed in Scotland.
                The first phase of the corpus is focusing on the collection of Scots and Scottish
                    English texts. However, the language varieties Scots and Scottish English are
                    themselves difficult to describe, and between these two extremes lie
                    multifarious other language varieties which defy rigid categorisation.
                    Established practice norms to ensure corpus representativeness cannot be easily
                    applied, as these Scottish language varieties have disparate and shifting
                    functional roles. Scottish English is generally accepted in a wider variety of
                    formal contexts than Scots, but Scots has stronger local and community ties
                    which may also exert a pressure. Social class and education also influence when
                    and where each language variety may be used. Indeed the labels 'Scots' and
                    'Scottish English' are themselves problematic, as written and spoken varieties
                    of Scots and Scottish English are not as closely linked as might be assumed.
                    There are numerous different local varieties, and so there is a strong regional
                    dimension to be considered. Native Scots themselves often disagree about what is
                    and is not 'Scots', before they even reach considerations of where its use is
                    and is not considered to be appropriate. The perceived status of Scots thus has
                    important implications for the text types and modes in which it is used. To date
                    there has been no large scale study to identify where each of these language
                    varieties is deemed acceptable usage by native Scots. Indeed, the native Scots
                    themselves have ambivalent and wide-ranging opinions on these language
                    varieties, and there are unspoken but nevertheless tangible rules which impact
                    on where and how and when they are used. Present-day Scots also has no agreed
                    standard spelling system, which presents problems when developing search tools
                    for the corpus.
                A balanced corpus which seeks to reflect the true linguistic situation in
                    Scotland must be sensitive to these problems and anomalies. It must reflect the
                    variety and breadth of possible linguistic options without skewing the data
                    along preconceived notions of what is and is not Scots or Scottish English. It
                    must also gather its texts from a discourse community which has very ambivalent
                    views about the range of language varieties it encompasses.
                This paper considers the problems presented for corpus design in view of the
                    complex linguistic situation that exists in Scotland. It considers questions
                    such as how to decide what should be included, how to choose, and in what
                    proportions relative to the corpus as a whole and to the range of possible
                    language varieties. It examines the problematic issue of how to construct a well
                    balanced and representative corpus in what is largely uncharted linguistic
                    territory. The paper will also consider points of comparison with other
                corpora.
            
        
    
