


    
        
            
                A logic programming environment for document semantics
                    and inference
                
                    
                        David
                        Dubin
                        
                            University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana
                            ddubin@uiuc.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Michael
                        Sperberg-McQueen
                        
                            World Wide Web Consortium, USA
                            cmsmcq@acm.org
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Allen
                        Renear
                        
                            University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana
                            renear@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Claus
                        Huitfeldt
                        
                            University of Bergen, Norway
                            Claus.Huitfeldt@hit.uib.no
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Recently Sperberg-McQueen and others have argued that markup functions by
                    licensing inferences about a text. They remark, however, that the information
                    warranting such inferences may not be entirely explicit in the syntax of the
                    markup language used to encode the text. (Sperberg-McQueen et al., 2001)
                For example, a language defined in SGML or XML may include an attribute (such as
                    'lang') that an encoder may apply to an element with the generic identifier
                    'QUOT.' One might then infer that the QUOT element marks an identifiable
                    component of the document (called a quotation) and that the quotation has the
                    property of being in a particular language (as indicated by the 'lang'
                    attribute). It may also be valid to infer that children of the 'QUOT' element
                    share the property of being in that language, unless overridden with a language
                    attribute of their own. On the other hand, there may not be such a simple
                    one-to-one mapping between components and elements: for example, a single
                    quotation may be broken across two or more 'QUOT' elements.
                There are a number of other inferences that are typically assumed by tag set
                    designers and application designers alike, but which cannot be formally
                    expressed in the DTD, and may or may not be informally expressed in the tag set
                    documentation.
                In order to adequately represent such inferences (the "meaning of markup") the
                    Sperberg-McQueen group developed techniques for expressing in predicate logic,
                    (i) the facts signalled by the encoding of a particular document instance and
                    (ii) the logical relationships commonly understood to exist and license further
                    inferences. A Prolog database was used to demonstrate the effectiveness of this
                    approach.
                The present paper builds directly on this previous work, and reflects new results
                    which provide more rigorous and explanatory layers of abstraction and progress
                    in understanding problems with "deictic" expressions and domains of variables,
                    etc. But the fundmental new result presented is the completion of a complete
                    integrated working system with an entirely new and substantially redesigned
                    Prolog database at its core. This Prolog database has been redesigned to improve
                    functionally, better reflect the theoretical results, and increase
                    functionality, flexibility, and performance.
                The system permits an analyst to specify facts about the markup syntax (e.g.,
                    generic identifiers and attribute values) separately from facts and rules of
                    inference about semantic entities and properties. The system provides a level of
                    abstraction at which the performative or interpretive meaning of the markup can
                    be explicitly represented in machine-readable and executable form. Inferences
                    can then be drawn regarding document components, including problematic
                    structures, such as those participating in overlapping hierarchies.
                The new Prolog database is integrated with an SGML/XML parser so that SGML and
                    XML instances can be input and output. Facts and rules of inference concerning
                    the document are expressed in Prolog's standard declarative syntax. We have
                    developed a collection of predicates that emulate a subset of the W3C's Document
                    Object Model methods for navigating the hierarchical structure of nodes, and
                    retrieving attribute values and information from the document type definition.
                    These predicates afford a clear separation of the syntactic information captured
                    by the parser and the document semantics expressed by the analyst.
                Another collection of predicates support deictic expression resolution. These
                    allow rules of inference to include location-relative pointing from one part of
                    the document to another. For example, we have predicates for resolving an
                    element's closest ancestor having a particular generic identifier, attribute, or
                    attribute value pair. Another set of predicates resolves the identity of an
                    element of a particular type occurring most closely in terms of the linear
                    structure of the document (rather than the closest in the hierarchy). A third
                    set of predicates supports the tracing of connections across elements, such as
                    those linked by ID and IDREF attribute pairs.
                Rules (axioms) represent the further logical relationships mentioned above, such
                    as for defeasible inheritance, distribution of distributive properties, etc.
                In developing the architecture of this system, we have adopted an object-oriented
                    strategy: each node identified by the parser and semantic entity instantiated
                    via a rule of inference has a unique identifier assigned by the system.
                    Predicates for retrieving or manipulating that information are written with the
                    aim of hiding the underlying data structure. The system architecture can
                    therefore be understood to have several distinct layers of representation:
                        1. A parser that handles the serialized document instance.
                        2. Predicates for processing the output of the parser.
                        3. Predicates for storing a representation of the parse tree in the
                            Prolog database.
                        4. Predicates for emulating DOM methods, deictic expression
                            resolution, object instantiation, and general characteristics of
                            properties (such as their inheritance and distribution).
                        5. Facts and rules of inference expressing the document
                            semantics.
                    
                The first two layers are implementation-dependent, and are designed to be
                    modular, allowing experimentation to improve robustness and scalability. We
                    intend the upper layers to be consistent across different implementations of the
                    system. Currently the interface between the lower and upper layers in written
                    entirely in Prolog, but we may employ other technologies (such as XSLT) in the
                    future.
                This system is being developed with the aim of advancing several interrelated
                    research goals. We will develop applications that provide a complete formal
                    account of the semantics of particular document classes. The system will also
                    provide an environment for experimenting with proposed or conjectured semantics
                    with the goal of improving document retrieval and conversion applications. We
                    also propose to build applications that draw inferences based on both document
                    semantics and domain or world knowledge.
                At this time the new Prolog database has been completed and tested and the entire
                    working system can be demonstrated on small fragments of TEI. By the conference
                    we hope to have completed the representation of the markup semantics of two XML
                    systems (XHTML and TEI-lite), which will allow us to be able to present a
                    substantial demonstration of the practical advantages of representing markup
                    semantics, as well as the theoretical soundness of this approach to the meaning
                    of markup.
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            Text in the Electronic Age: Textual Study and Text
                                Encoding, with Examples from Medieval Texts
                        
                        
                            Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                            
                                6
                                1
                                
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Claus
                                    Huitfeldt
                                
                            
                            Meaning and Interpretation of Markup
                        
                        
                            Markup Languages: Theory and Practice
                            
                                2
                                3
                                215-234
                                2001
                            
                        
                        Originally delivered at ALLC/ACH 2000 in Glasgow.
                    
                
            
        
    
