


    
        
            
                Ordering Chaos: A Virtual Archive of Whitman Poetry
                    Manuscripts
                
                    
                        Mary
                        Ellen
                        Ducey
                        
                            University of Nebraska-Lincoln
                            mducey2@unl.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Andrew
                        Jewell
                        
                            University of Nebraska-Lincoln
                            ajewell2@bigred.unl.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Kenneth
                        Price
                        
                            University of Nebraska-Lincoln
                            kprice@unlnotes.unl.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Walt Whitman's manuscripts as a whole are poorly understood and, curiously, the
                    most important group of them, the poetry manuscripts, have never been collected
                    and edited, despite his foundational role in American culture. Whitman's poetry
                    manuscripts are found in approximately thirty different repositories, and the
                    quality and depth of description varies across these repositories. Because the
                    materials are dispersed and irregularly documented, scholars interested in the
                    development of Whitman's poetry-through multiple drafts to finished work-cannot
                    locate and examine the relevant documents without great expense of time and
                    money.
                Our paper reports on our early successes and ongoing efforts to create a unified,
                    item-level guide to all of Whitman's poetry manuscripts held in the US and the
                    UK. Our work is an unprecedented use of Encoded Archival Description (EAD), a
                    standard supported by the Society of American Archivists and the Library of
                    Congress. The depth of our item-level description and our ability to pull
                    together disparate collections to create a single virtual finding aid make this
                    project distinctive. This guide, or Virtual Archive, will soon be incorporated
                    into, and will be maintained by, the Walt Whitman Archive (), an NEH-supported project
                    organized and affiliated with the Institute for Advanced Technology at the
                    University of Virginia (IATH).
                Thanks to a grant of $10,000 given to the Whitman project from the Gladys
                    Krieble Delmas Foundation, we have established the framework for this project at
                    the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The Delmas Foundation funding has supported
                    the development of an encoded finding aid to poetry manuscripts in the Charles
                    Feinberg Collection of Walt Whitman at the Library of Congress. The next steps
                    for our project will be, first, to link and coordinate our EAD finding aid to
                    ones developed by the New York Public Library and Duke University, and, second,
                    to collect, organize, and present records from various smaller institutions that
                    currently have only paper-based or HTML records of their Whitman holdings. The
                    Whitman Virtual Archive is conceived as an attempt to provide universal access
                    from the collection to the item level for all Whitman manuscript resources
                    distributed in over sixty repositories. It will provide a centralized online
                    finding aid that will pull together and regularize information that now exists
                    in these different institutions in partial and inconsistent forms, and it will
                    provide a search interface adapted to the particular nature of the Whitman
                    manuscripts and the special needs of their users.
                This work is crucial because Whitman frequently left his manuscripts untitled,
                    and when he did title them, he often used a title different from that employed
                    in any of the six distinct editions of Leaves of Grass.
                    It is thus difficult for anyone but a specialist to correctly identify and
                    categorize Whitman's manuscripts, a difficulty compounded by the fact that
                    Whitman's poems sometimes began as prose jottings and only gradually evolved
                    into verse. In such cases, specialists can help identify manuscripts that are in
                    fact the working papers contributing to poems. That identification can, in turn,
                    be encoded into the EAD finding aid, enriching access and understanding for a
                    wide network of archivists, scholars, and students.
                Our project builds upon work done by the American Heritage Virtual Archive and
                    the Research Libraries Group. One of the goals of the American Heritage Virtual
                    Archive (funded by NEH) was to integrate "collections that have been dispersed
                    among two or more institutions (such as the Mark Twain collections at Virginia
                    and Berkeley)" and to experiment "with cooperatively creating a single finding
                    aid, in which separate components are used to describe each of the separate
                    collections held at separate repositories" (). However, because of
                    its broad scope-American heritage materials of all sorts-the goal of creating a
                    single, integrated finding aid was not reached. This remains an important
                    research objective, and we believe that a project involving scholars with a
                    focused interest in a more limited subject area (Whitman, rather than all of
                    American Heritage) can attain it.
                For Whitman studies, what is needed is a single index in which one can find all
                    the various manuscript drafts and notebook versions of any single poem. Our
                    paper will detail the processes and struggles of creating such an index. From
                    collecting finding aids and creating partnerships with other institutions, to
                    developing a proper encoding standard and establishing good cross-department
                    working relations, our project has embodied many of the benefits and challenges
                    of integrating computing into the humanities. By identifying our procedures, and
                    by laying out our future hurdles, we will contribute to a broader discussion of
                    how scholars and archivists can collaborate effectively and of how the potential
                    of EAD can be realized.

            
        
    
