


    
        
            
                The Austrian Academy Corpus - Digital Resources and
                    Textual Studies
                
                    
                        Hanno
                        Biber
                        
                            Austrian Academy Corpus
                            hanno.biber@oeaw.ac.at
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Evelyn
                        Breiteneder
                        
                            Austrian Academy Corpus
                            evelyn.breiteneder@oeaw.ac.at
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Karlheinz
                        Moerth
                        
                            Austrian Academy Corpus
                            karlheinz.moerth@oeaw.ac.at
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                In this paper we will describe the aims, the main research objectives and the
                    crucial computational aspects in establishing a large electronic text corpus. In
                    the first part the concept of our corpus approach will be given and its
                    backgroud as well as its consequences discussed. In the second part of the paper
                    noteable features of the digitization processes based upon the application of
                    XML-Schemas will be discussed.
                The Austrian Academy Corpus (AAC) is a newly founded institution based within the
                    Austrian Academy of Sciences in Vienna. Its aim is to set up a text corpus and
                    also to conduct research in the field of electronic text corpora. Electronic
                    text collections to date have been generally focused on linguistic studies and
                    lexicography,and designed and set up for language-orientated research. Recently,
                    the perspective has changed towards providing resources for scholars from
                    various fields within the humanities. The AAC is attempting to establish a
                    corpus that meets the needs of textual studies and conveys essential information
                    about language and history. The AAC functions as an example of an experimental
                    corpus that is predominantly designed for textual studies. It will be a
                    complexly structured text collection in which sources from a variety of fields
                    will be included. The AAC also aims to include a wide range of significant texts
                    from various cultural domains, which will be carefully selected as being of key
                    historical and cultural significance and relevance. The AAC will create,
                    structure, provide and analyse selected text sources from the past two
                    centuries, taking advantage of the latest standards and techniques in electronic
                    text processing. The AAC intends to digitally store a wide selection of
                    different sources of scholarly, journalistic and political texts which were of
                    considerable influence in the period between 1848 and 1989. It has started the
                    digitisation and structured integration of texts, amongst which are for example
                    several influential and notable literary and political journals, such as “Die
                    Weltbühne” or “Die Aktion”, published in Berlin in the first decades of the last
                    century, and the Austrian journal “Der Brenner”, published in Innsbruck, as well
                    as many other sources. The famous satirical magazine “Die Fackel”, published by
                    Karl Kraus in Vienna, will constitute the core of the AAC and will be a starting
                    point for future selections of texts. Images and manuscripts will be included in
                    the corpus, where necessary, because the original graphical and typographical
                    information is important for the meaning and interpretation of digitised texts.
                    This is particularly the case with complex text structures such as newspapers or
                    literary journals which comprise a whole variety of functionally different text
                    types within their structure.
                Digital resources in the form of electronic text corpora should be regarded as
                    structures for representing complex information. The electronic text collections
                    established at the AAC so far and its future projects will focus on electronic
                    representations not only of literary texts, literary magazines, journals and
                    newspapers but also on a carefully considered selection of texts from several
                    other cultural and social domains. Special emphasis will be placed on areas that
                    have been rather neglected in humanities computing to date. Journals and
                    newspapers pose an especially difficult task when it comes to their
                    representation in digital form. An equally difficult task is the analysis and
                    description of the media’s decisive historical influences and contexts. The
                    study and detailed investigation of texts has always been crucial for our
                    understanding of historical processes. The knowledge of texts and the
                    accessibility of textual knowledge can be furthered by means of large text
                    corpora like the AAC.
                The text selection for the AAC, which will take place at the same time as the
                    corpus work, will be guided by thematic and empirical criteria, as well as
                    factors specifically related to the type of text. The specificity of text type
                    is therefore, amongst others, a decisive factor not only for the selection of
                    texts but also for their categorisation in a corpus: letters by Oskar Kokoschka,
                    anecdotes by Max Liebermann, writings of Adolf Loos, narrations by Adalbert
                    Stifter, feature articles by Daniel Spitzer, funeral sermons, electoral
                    speeches, propaganda and advertising slogans, pop song lyrics, political
                    speeches, comic books, instructions, travel guides, TV programmes, mailing
                    catalogues, and so on.. In recent years, the establishment of large German
                    language corpora has been restricted to the field of linguistic and
                    lexicographic studies. So far, there have not been any large-scale initiatives
                    in the area of text-centred studies. Although more and more literary texts are
                    becoming available, many of these came into existence as by-products of efforts
                    to amass data for lexicographic research. Generally speaking, the historical
                    period on which the Austrian Academy Corpus is working is poorly documented in
                    terms of digital literary texts. This applies even more when it comes to
                    collective text ‘carriers’ such as magazines, papers, yearbooks, commemorative
                    volumes and similar materials.
                Among the sources being digitised for the AAC are a considerable number of
                    historical literary magazines of major importance. One example is the journal
                    “Der Brenner”, which was published by Ludwig Ficker in Innsbruck from 1910 until
                    1954. Among its contributors are figures as renowned as Carl Dallago, Theodor
                    Haecker, Else Lasker-Schüler, Adolf Loos, and Georg Trakl. Other sources on
                    which the AAC is working were published in Berlin, for instance, the journal
                    “Die Aktion” edited by Franz Pfemfert between 1911 and 1932. Among its
                    contributors were Peter Altenberg, Hermann Bahr, Walter Benjamin, Max Brod,
                    Richard Dehmel, Salomo Friedlaender, Georg Heym, Kurt Hiller, Max Oppenheimer,
                    Egon Schiele and August Strindberg. Another journal to be mentioned here and
                    perhaps the most important one in the pipeline is the weekly Berlin journal “Die
                    Schaubühne” (1905 - 18), later renamed “Die Weltbühne” (1918 - 33,) which was
                    edited by Siegfried Jacobsohn, Kurt Tucholsky and Carl von Ossietzky. Among the
                    writers who contributed to “Die Weltbühne” were Henry Barbusse, Bertolt Brecht,
                    Alfred Döblin, Lion Feuchtwanger, Arthur Koestler, Heinrich Mann, Alfred Polgar,
                    Romain Rolland, and Leon Trotsky.
                To produce a digital version of, for example, the literary journals “Der Brenner”
                    or “Die Weltbühne”, the original text has to undergo the usual stages of
                    electronic processing. After being scanned, the text is made readable by means
                    of OCR. The structure of the text (pages, paragraphs and lines) is identified by
                    automatic routines. Application of markup is the last step in this process. Tags
                    encoding content are carefully inserted by literary scholars especially trained
                    for this task. This process, which takes several runs, is accompanied by
                    proofreading against the original and constant checking and validating of the
                    achieved results. Literary encoding projects in the past have employed SGML,
                    very often following the TEI Guidelines (P3). The AAC makes extensive use of
                    XML’s modular system of specifications. Aside from the basic XML specification,
                    several other specifications exist, all of them having more or less defined
                    place within the overall framework provided by XML. The exact nature of some of
                    these specifications is not yet clear (XLink, XML Query), as development work
                    still continues apace. Those that are classified as recommendations are XSLT
                    (Extensible Stylesheet Transformations) and XPath (a language for addressing
                    parts of an XML document). The implications of others such as XLink (Extensible
                    Linking Language), XPointer (an abstract language that specifies locations), and
                    XQL (Extensible Query Language) for literary computing will have to be
                    considered in due course. As XML comes of age, the issue of a standard way of
                    defining the structure of documents becomes more and more important. Both
                    traditional DTDs (document type definitions) and XML Schemas are formats which
                    model document structures. Whereas DTDs in the traditional sense have been
                    around for some time and are widely accepted in the field of SGML-based
                    text-encoding, XML Schemas must be regarded as a fledgling technology that still
                    has to win its spurs.
                XML Schemas are commonly regarded as an attempt at an XML answer to the problem
                    of defining the structure, content and semantics of documents. There are several
                    arguments in favour of XML Schemas, among which are XML syntax, object
                    orientation, inheritance, polymorphism and datatyping. Firstly, XML Schemas
                    follow XML syntax rules, which makes it possible to parse them with XML tools.
                    Nowadays, authors of XML documents often regard traditional DTDs as unwieldy and
                    inconsistent with the structure of XML. With XML Schemas, validating parsers can
                    be built on the basis of XML syntax. Secondly, XML Schemas may include explicit
                    restrictions on the data types an element may hold. They allow the text
                    programmer to attribute data types such as strings, numbers (integer, floating
                    point), date and time formats, boolean and others to elements constituting an
                    XML document. In addition, XML Schemas are also intended to allow the definition
                    of new data types to future refine the markup scheme being used. For the corpus
                    holdings of the AAC such applications are investigated and implemented for the
                    benefit of various corpus-based linguistic and textual studies.
            
        
    
