


    
        
            
                Interpreting Animation and Vice Versa: Can We
                    Philosophize in Flash?
                
                    
                        John
                        Zuern
                        
                            University of Hawaii-Manoa
                            zuern@hawaii.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                From the notorious HTML &lt;blink&gt; tag and simple animated GIFs to
                    elaborate cinematic presentations produced with Java, DHTML, or authoring
                    systems such as Macromedia Flash, Macromedia Shockwave, and Adobe LiveObject,
                    moving images and texts have become a ubiquitous feature of the World Wide Web.
                    As computer animation technologies have become more robust and accessible,
                    animations of all kinds have become more prevalent in electronic art and
                    literature, displays of information, and pedagogical materials. For scholars
                    working to develop critical methodologies for the analysis of electronic media,
                    computer animations--whether they take the form of word-and-image poetry,
                    film-like narratives, or diagrammatic representations of philosophical
                    concepts--offer challenging moving targets. Animation requires an interpretive
                    approach that can account not only for the role of spatial and temporal
                    dimensions in the production of the work's meaning, but also for the technical,
                    code-based operations that create the specific animated elements in the work. As
                    this presentation will argue, engaging the complex issues involved in a
                    hermeneutics of animation propels us toward a recognition of the potential of
                    animation as a medium of hermeneutic reflection in its own right. Extending to
                    computer animation the same consideration that has recently been given to
                    scholarly hypertext [2, 5] leads us to a view of animation not simply as the
                    object of hermeneutic inquiry, but as a way of "doing hermeneutics" in the
                    strong sense of philosophizing about meaning and interpretation.
                Focusing on a small set of concrete examples, this presentation briefly outlines
                    a set of questions confronting the interpretation of computer animation:
                        1. What is the semiotic function of the movement of elements in an
                            animation? This question elicits more or less straightforward answers
                            only when we are discussing "representational" animations that strive
                            for versimilitude of movement in animated figures (realistic gaits in
                            humans and other creatures, for example--the sum of the animated
                            movements means "walking"). When the movement is essentially
                            "non-mimetic" (the appearance and disappearance of text, for example),
                            how do we understand the contribution of the motion to the "whole"
                            meaning of the work?
                        2. What is the relationship of the precise chronometic time and
                            geometric space assigned to elements in the code of the animation (the
                            values of a setTimeout method in JavaScript, for example) to the
                            phenomenological experience of time and space produced in the work for a
                            reader [10] (such as the perception of an object crossing the screen
                            "slowly")? As much as the programming that underlies traditional
                            hypertext systems, the technical substrata of computer animation
                            suggests a need for a comparative method that reads the text of the code
                            alongside the manifest text of the work on the screen, viewing the
                            finished animation as a dialogic hybrid of (at least) two distinct
                            languages.
                        3. Is it possible (or useful) to distinguish broad genres of animation
                            that correspond to narrative, lyric, and drama? How does the sequencing
                            of elements in an animation intersect with the rhetorical conventions of
                            these traditional genres, and in what ways can the movement of animation
                            disrupt and complicate these forms? Can we imagine, following Kolb's
                            work on hypertext writing in philosophy [6], a dialectical,
                            argumentative mode of animation?
                        4. How do animated elements contribute to whatever forms of
                            interactivity a specific electronic work invites?
                        5. How do animations intersect with other communication technologies,
                            especially the hypertext systems in which they are often embedded?
                        
                    
                Each of the examples I discuss illustrate these challenges. in addition, each
                    indicates the potential of animation as a means of visualizing theoretical
                    concepts and hermeneutic procedures. Josh Santangelo's DHTML poem "Iris" cites
                    and interprets lines of D. H. Lawrence [9]; the collaborative Flash project "Im
                    Zeitalter der Konversationseuphorie" by Merkel, R. et al. presents an elaborate
                    meditation on the possibilities and impossibilities of human communication [11];
                    and Charles Heinemann's "Jacques Lacan's Imaginary Prisoner Game" offers a
                    Java-driven dramatization of one of Lacan's models of temporality in the psyche
                    [4].
                To reinforce my claim that animation provides a powerful medium for critical and
                    metacritical discourse in the fields of philosophy and literary criticism, I
                    will conclude my presentation with a few examples of work from a graduate
                    seminar in aesthetics in which students produced web-based diagrams of concepts
                    as a way of investigating their developing theoretical frameworks. Students drew
                    on the approach to modeling concepts introduced by Gilles Deleuze and Felix
                    Guattari [3] and W.J.T. Mitchell's critical iconology, especially the
                    formulation of "ut pictora theoria" [8]. Their diagrams presented both single
                    concepts such as "intertextuality" and "power" as well as relationships among
                    concepts, such as the intersection of "authenticity," "justice,"
                    "representation," and "community." Working together to produce protocols for
                    animating these diagrams in Macromedia Flash led the seminar participants into
                    dynamic discussions of the processes, relations, hierarchies, and even the
                    contradictions that structure--and animate--our thinking about literature and
                    culture.
                Computer animation not only invites us to shuttle among different fields,
                    shifting, for example, from theories of editing effects in the cinema to
                    narratological accounts of sequence and perspective to phenomenological
                    reflections on the cognition of movement; it also expands the range of
                    disciplines that can help us understand how movement can produce, problematize,
                    and impede meaning. My paper suggests that in order for critics of electronic
                    media to account more fully for the phenomenon of online animation, we will at
                    the same time have to take fuller advantage of the medium for the expression of
                    our own critical ideas. The natural sciences frequently employ digital animation
                    techniques for the purpose of visualizing structures, processes, and
                    relationships within a wide range of data [1]. Envisioning a philosophical
                    writing practice in the humanities (including, of course, intellectual work such
                    as literary and cultural criticism) in which animation serves more than an
                    ancillary, illustrative role in an occasional diagram is one way to meet the
                    challenge of what Adrian Miles has called the "riskful writing" that
                    acknowledges hypertext's debt to cinematic forms. As I hope to demonstrate,
                    however, even these simple diagrams and modest literary productions are in a
                    sense rehearsals for a lively future discourse in--and not merely
                    about--electronic media.
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Valliere
                                    Richard
                                    Auzenne
                                
                            
                            The Visualization Quest: A History of Computer
                                Animation
                            
                                London/Toronto
                                Associated University Presses
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Bernstein
                                
                            
                            Patterns of Hypertext
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Frank
                                    Shipman
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Elli
                                    Mylonas
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Kaj
                                    Groenback
                                
                            
                            Proceedings of Hypertext '98
                            
                                New York
                                Association For Computing Machinery
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    Deleuze
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    F.
                                    Guattari
                                
                            
                            Qu'est-ce que la philosophie?
                            
                                Paris
                                Les Editions de Minuit
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Heinemann
                                
                            
                            Lacan's Imaginary Prisoner Game
                        
                        
                            Enculturation: Cultural Theories &amp;
                                Rhetorics
                            
                                1
                                2
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                        
                            11 November 2001.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Kolb
                                
                            
                            Scholarly Hypertext: Self-Represented
                                Complexity
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of Hypertext '97
                            
                                New York
                                Association For Computing Machinery
                                1997
                                29-37
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Kolb
                                
                            
                            Socrates in the Labyrinth: Hypertext, Argument,
                                Philosophy
                            
                                Cambridge, MA
                                Eastgate Systems
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Miles
                                
                            
                            Cinematic Paradigms for Hypertext
                        
                        
                            Continuum: Journal of Media &amp; Cultural
                                Studies
                            
                                13
                                2
                                217-225
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    W.
                                    J.
                                    T.
                                    Mitchell
                                
                            
                            Picture Theory
                            
                                Chicago
                                University of Chicago
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Santangelo
                                
                            
                            Iris
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                         11
                            November 2001
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Souriau
                                
                            
                            The Aesthetics of Movement
                            
                                
                                    Manon
                                    Souriau
                                
                            
                            
                                Amherst, MA
                                University of Massachusetts Press
                                1983
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Merkel
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Paulus
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Wagner
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    T.
                                    Mora
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    T.
                                    Duckers
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Wetzel
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    Helmke
                                
                            
                            Im Zeitalter der Konversationseuphorie
                        
                        
                            Softmoderne Online Magazin
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                         11 November 2001
                    
                
            
        
    
