


    
        
            
                The Meta Dictionary
                
                    
                        Christian-Emil
                        Ore
                        
                            University of Oslo
                            c.e.s.ore@muspro.uio.no
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    In this paper we will present a lexicographic database tool called The Meta Dictionary. It is designed for systematising
                        word and phrase information from field datasets for weakly normalised
                        languages and dialects. The Meta Dictionary has
                        been developed to function as a pivot in the revitalisation of a large
                        traditional national dictionary project in Norway. In addition to completing
                        the traditional dictionary manuscript, this revitalisation project has the
                        objective of creating a modern lexical database in a way similar to what is
                        now being done for The Oxford English Dictionary
                        [10] or the The Cobuild Word Bank [4]. The
                        Norwegian dictionary project was started in 1930, and the editors are now at
                        the end of the letter H. According to the new plan this will be finished in
                        2014. The Meta Dictionary system is meant to be a
                        general tool for working with lexicographic raw material and is not limited
                        to the Norwegian dictionary project. The plan is to use it in a project on
                        the minority languages in Zimbabwe in (2002-2205). However, it can also be
                        adapted to implement semantical database based on different ontologies
                        (semantic models) like the one used in WordNet [12]
                        or in The Simple Project [11 ]. he
                            Meta Dictionary and the other lexicographical tools described in
                        this paper are developed by The Museum Project
                        (MusPro). The MusPro was established in the spring of 1998 as a national
                        collaborative project involving all four Norwegian universities. The
                        objective is to develop common database systems for the meta data and the
                        management of collections, accessible for all Norwegian University museums.
                        The project organisation has taken over the responsibility for maintaining
                        and developing the database systems for the department of lexicography (old
                        Norse and modern Norwegian) and place name studies, and is a direct
                        continuation of the systems development group in The Documentation Project a
                        major digitalisation project in the 1990-ies.
                
                
                    Lexicographical background - the hetrogenousity of a language
                    In Norway several linguistically oriented research groups participated in the
                        development of electronic corpora from the beginning of the 1970's, (LOB,
                        ICAME corpus projects, see [6]), but for unknown reasons the development of
                        corpora consisting of Norwegian texts did not start before the end of the
                        1990's. As a parallel - there is still no complete and comprehensive
                        national dictionary for Norwegian. Both cases have connections to the
                        fluctuating language situation in Norway and the two closely related written
                        Norweigan languages. On a world basis two written languages in a country is
                        neither unusual nor impressive. What makes the Norwegian case unusual is the
                        fact that two languages are completely comprehensible for all Norwegian
                        speaking persons, that there are no clear- cut boundaries between the two, a
                        rich flora of accepted alternative spellings and inflection schemas and
                        finally frequent spelling reforms (although the period between these is
                        increased to 4 years). The two written standards derived from written Danish
                        (the only official written language in Norway from the sixteenth century
                        until 1870) and on a synthesis of the dialects in the western parts of
                        Norway. The latter was created by the linguist Ivar Aasen (see Norwegian
                        Dictionary, 1872 [7]). During the last 130 years the standards have
                        gradually become much closer. However, in non-official written communication
                        many archaic forms are still in use. In private written communication people
                        often mix the two standards. The language situation introduces many problems
                        for the language technology industry and makes good solutions complex and
                        expensive to develop. However, the relatively weak normalisation and the
                        focus on dialects have a democratic effect, e.g. it is possible to use a
                        written language pretty close to one's own spoken language. In most European
                        countries normally thought of as a homogeneous language areas with a single
                        official written language, there are in fact many distinct dialects or even
                        related languages. The German language area (Germany, Austria and parts of
                        Switzerland) is one example. Thus it can be argued that the language
                        situation we find in Norway is the norm. However, the Norwegian language
                        policy is more complex than may be expected. In recent years initiatives
                        have been taken to at least complete the national dictionaries in Norway. It
                        now looks as if there will be two printed dictionaries in respectively 7 and
                        12 volumes. The former will concentrate on the originally Danish based
                        written language (used by most of the population) and will be based on an
                        already existing dictionary in six volumes. The latter will describe the
                        second written language and the Norwegian dialects although this is not
                        planned as a dialect dictionary in the purest sense of the term. The work on
                        this dictionary has already been running for 60 years. The editors are now
                        working at the end of the letter H and at the current pace the dictionary
                        will be finished in 2040. The Ministry of Culture has, pending the
                        reorganisation of the team, and its completion by the year 2014, rather
                        generously refunded the work. The new project is called Norwegian Dictionary 2014 (ND2014). From 2002 the editorial
                        team will be increased from 6 to 28 full time editors. The main focus is on
                        a method and tool for systematising source material and preparing the
                        semantic skeletons of the entries. To explain the idea and the specific use
                        of The Meta Dictionary we will briefly discuss our
                        interdisciplinary database framework and the heterogeneous lexicographical
                        source material.
                
                
                    Creating a multidisciplinary object oriented, database framework
                    To make database systems for the large number of disciplines is a challenge
                        for a small group. An additional challenge is the requirement of providing
                        for interdisciplinary searches. The number of databases and the aspect of
                        inter-disciplinarity has forced us to try to make as generic database
                        solutions as possible. The design and implementation of the common systems
                        and interfaces are now completed in the first version. The new information
                        system replaces older, mostly independent database applications. This is
                        fortunate since it is easier to create new interconnecting systems instead
                        of connecting old ones, although technologies like the Z39.50 standard have
                        opened for the relatively easy interconnection of databases. The system
                        group attempts to think generically along two axes: 
                            Common interface tools and database functionality
                            Common database solutions for common object types like
                                geographical data, bibliographical data, data concerning individuals
                                and legal bodies, classification systems in cultural and natural
                                history, dictionary entries and so on.
                        
                    The databases are event oriented. The information is considered to be the
                        result of observations and all major changes result from a well-defined
                        event. The event -based object oriented model is also used in the tools now
                        designed for the dictionary project ND2014. The system consists of three
                        parts: 1) The databases containing the background material, that is,
                        databases containing the old slip collections, dictionary manuscripts,
                        bibliography etc., editors notes and the corpora of older literary text and
                        modern Norwegian. 2) The dictionary editing system 3) the backbone of the
                        system, The Meta Dictionary itself.
                
                
                    The Lexicographic source material
                    In the late eighteenth century, paper slip collections were introduced in
                        dictionary making. A single word form with an example of actual usage was
                        written on each paper slip. The slip collections were stored in alphabetic
                        order in large filing cabinets. This was a major achievement and introduced
                        scientific methods into lexicography. From the end of the 18th century most
                        large-scale dictionary projects, e.g. The Oxford English
                            Dictionary (OED, first edition
                        completed in 1930), have been based on slip collections such as this one. At
                        the outset of 1960 one started to use computers to create concordances from
                        electronically stored texts and the use of slip collections was regarded
                        increasingly as being old fashioned. Over the last 10 years the number of
                        corpora has exploded: there are now text corpora for large number of
                        languages and social groups. It is almost impossible to imagine that someone
                        should start building a paper slip collection today. However, many of the
                        large dictionary projects initiated in the first half of the 20th century
                        and even earlier are not completed and still rely on their slip collections
                        (The Afrikaans Dictionary, WAT, The Dictionary of the Swedish Academy, Dutch
                        national dictionary, to mention a few). The two major Norwegian dictionaries
                        were planned in the tradition of the large historically oriented, national
                        dictionaries like OED and during the years slips were collected (numbering
                        more than 6 millions today). In the 1990 most of the old collections were
                        made electronically available either as indexed electronic facsimiles (3.2
                        millions) or replaced by collections of SGML tagged electronic texts. A
                        series of older dictionaries and historical word lists from the end of the
                        seventeenth century and onwards was also made electronically. This was done
                        by the forerunner of The Museum Project, The Documentation Project, and has been described
                        at ALLC/ACH 1995 and 1996 ([5][9]).
                
                
                    The editing system
                    A standard electronic editing system for a dictionary manuscript is based on
                        a database in which the entries and parts of the entries are stored. Each
                        entry can be stored in one or many tables, e.g. separate tables for the
                        headword parts, the definitions and the citations, or the entire manuscript
                        can be stored in a XML based free text system. A typical editing system
                        usually supports cross-referencing, searching and the production of
                        camera-ready page lay out. MusPro has made several such freestanding tools
                        for a national language project in Zimbabwe (Shona and Ndbele)[2] and for
                        one volumes dictionary in Norwegian. The latter are both free standing and
                        connected to the common framework and the Meta Dictionary.
                
                
                    The Meta Dictionary
                    The source databases/datasets (described above) contains samples from
                        different dialects and times. The most important lexicographical task is to
                        systematise the material into groups, each describing a descriptive word.
                        This process is called the lemma/headword selection. For strongly normalised
                        written languages like Standard English this is normally not considered a
                        difficult task. For field lexicographers working on not so normalised
                        languages, this is well known as difficult task. The question "what is a
                        word "and how to select the right candidate among a set of variants is not a
                        trivial task. For most existing languages the standardisation has been
                        mostly based on socio-political circumstances. The Meta
                            Dictionary system has no features for (semi)automatic lema
                        selection but is designed to assist the lexicographers in the process, to
                        make it easier for others to check the lexicographers' decisions and open
                        for more than one normalisation based on the same material.
                    In this process we have tried to exploit the interdisciplinary nature of our
                        organisation to make a tool for preparing the entries in the Norwegian
                        Dictionary to create a general tool for systematising information from
                        weakly normalised languages and /or dialect material into a lexical
                        database.
                    
                        The Meta Dictionary is based on the general system
                        for the users' electronic notebooks or folders used in all our
                        database-applications. In general all our users can store parts of the
                        result from a query for later use in their private notebooks in the system.
                        The notebooks are multi-typed and can store information of all the object
                        types in the databases. Traditionally, a working lexicographer usually sorts
                        the available material first under each headword and then according to the
                        meanings and use before formulating the definitions. In The
                            Meta Dictionary an entry is a folder containing samples use
                        taken from the source databases and corpus system connected to it. The user
                        uses the drag and drop mechanism to move pieces of source information into
                        the folder. Each entry/folder is labelled by the normalised word(s) and word
                        class information and information about the actual orthographically standard
                        used. The database used by the editorial team of the Collins Cobuild dictionary in the lemma selection of from the
                        corpus is an early example of such a database. Several standards can be used
                        simultaneously in The Meta Dictionary. This is
                        useful in the Norwegian context. One possible application could for example
                        be a Meta Dictionary for German dialects having a Low German and a High
                        German normalisation. A more realistic application of The
                            Meta Dictionary system is to use it as a descriptive tool for
                        old written languages like Old Norse. It is planned to be used in
                        systematising the data from the fieldwork on minority languages in Zimbabwe
                        in the phase 3 of the The ALLEX Project
                        (2002-2005) [2]. In the Norwegian dictionary (ND2014) project The Meta Dictionary system has been used during the
                        last 2 years and more than 150 000 entries out of a total estimated to 450
                        000 have been created. The Meta Dictionary can be
                        seen as an amalgamation of a lexical database, an electronic slip
                        collection, a set of older dictionaries and a editing tool or database with
                        a growing manuscript for ND2014. The backbone of The Meta
                            Dictionary is the list of all the headwords from A to Å (the
                        last letter in the Norwegian alphabet). The other information is linked to
                        this list. The source materials in the entries/folders can be view in their
                        original layout. That is, all the samples can be displayed "inline" as they
                        are in their separate databases.
                
                
                    Connecting the editing of the dictionary and The Meta
                            Dictionary
                    The basic Meta Dictionary is a tool for group the background information
                        (samples) to (head)words. In a (monolingual) dictionary the defining parts
                        of the entries usually are divided in a tree like structure reflecting the
                        semantics of the words. Thus The Meta Dictionary
                        used in the NO2014-project is linked to the editing system by a drag and
                        drop based interface for sorting the information in The
                            Meta Dictionary entry/folder into a tree-like hierarchy which in
                        turn can be view by the editor in the editing system as the skeleton of an
                        ordinary entry in ND2014. By these means it is possible to survey back and
                        forth between the collected source material and the dictionary manuscript.
                        These links will be kept after the editing of an entry is finished.
                        Furthermore, the entry for a given word will automatically be placed in
                            The Meta Dictionary entry/folder. The
                        NO2014-entry will "live" together with its sources and in fact be just
                        another information piece describing that word. In a corresponding way it is
                        relatively easy to connect/extend The Meta
                        Dictionary to WORDNET-like descriptions or any other ontology-based
                        semantic structures.
                    The users of The Meta Dictionary connected to ND2014
                        do not need to have a ND2014 perspective on the word information, but may
                        freely chose their focus. The information given in ND2014 is simply one out
                        of many seen in a time perspective. We believe that the The
                            Meta Dictionary also is well suited to create a general tool for
                        systematising information from weakly normalised languages and /or dialect
                        material into a lexical database.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christian-Emil
                                    Ore
                                
                            
                            Making an interdiciplinary system
                        
                        
                            ALLC/ACH 1993, Georgetown University, Georgetown, USA
                            
                                
                                
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                             The African Languages Lexicography Project (The ALLEX
                                project)
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            The COBUILD dictionary
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        and pointers to the project: 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jon
                                    Holmen
                                
                            
                            New life for old reports - The Archaeological Part of
                                the National Documentation Project of Norway
                        
                        
                            ALLC/ACH 1996, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
                            
                                
                                
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            HIT (Programme for Information Technology in the
                                Humanities)
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    I.
                                    Aasen
                                
                            
                            Norsk Ordbok [Norwegian Dictionary]
                            
                                Norway
                                Christiania
                                1872
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Norsk Ordbok [Norwegian Dictionary]
                            
                                Volumes I-IV
                                
                                
                                1950-2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christian-Emil
                                    Ore
                                
                            
                            The Corpus and the Citation Archive - Peaceful
                                Coexistence Between the Best and the Good?
                        
                        
                            ALLC/ACH 1995, University of Santa Barbara, Santa
                                Barbara USA
                            
                                
                                
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Oxford English Dictionary
                            
                                Oxford
                                
                                1928
                            
                        
                        and 
                    
                    
                        
                            The SIMPLE project
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            WORDNET
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
