


    
        
            
                Reconceiving Text Analysis
                
                    
                        Stephen
                        Ramsay
                        
                            IATH, University of Virginia
                            sjr3@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        John
                        Bradley
                        
                            King's College London
                            john.bradley@kcl.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Geoffrey
                        Rockwell
                        
                            McMaster University
                            grockwel@mcmaster.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Stéfan
                        Sinclair
                        
                            University of Alberta
                            Stefan.Sinclair@ualberta.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    How can we use computers to assist us in the interpretation of literary
                        texts?
                    On the one hand, this has the ring of a settled question. Half of the
                        humanities computing community works to make texts available to researchers
                        and provides facilities whereby those texts may be searched, annotated, and
                        linked. The other half produces tools for textual analysis that allow us to
                        undertake complex statistical and procedural analyses. Yet most humanists
                        outside of our discipline conceive of these activities as either
                        pre-interpretive, or else outside of the normative realm of critical
                        exegesis found in literary criticism, philosophy, history, and the various
                        other disciplines which take the text as central to the endeavor.
                    This panel brings together four creators of text analysis software interested
                        in reconceiving the activity from a theoretical standpoint. Panelists will
                        address a range of questions about text analysis: Can text analysis be
                        reconceived as fundamentally an act of text enrichment--not a taking from,
                        but an adding to the text being analyzed? What happens when text analysis is
                        thought of not as the quest for empirical data about texts, but as a
                        technology more in line with the readerly quest for novel patterns? How
                        might we re-theorize the classical modes of text analysis (searching, word
                        frequency analysis, stylometrics) as participating in the hermeneutics of
                        play?
                    We conceive of this session neither as a critique of existing systems nor as
                        as a commentary on text analysis as it is brought to bear on problems in
                        computational linguistics. Rather, we conceive of this session as theorizing
                        text analysis in literary studies and other fields with similar
                        hermeneutical practices with an eye toward the future of text analysis
                        tools. We realize that proposing such a session in Tübingen, the home of
                        TUSTEP, is like bringing coals to Newcastle, but we offer this panel as a
                        perspective from across the waters -- a different tradition of text analysis
                        and computing.
                    [Note: We have requested that this proposal be considered as a session,
                        despite the fact that we are proposing the delivery of four formal papers.
                        However, we are prepared to adjust ourselves to the time constraints as
                        necessary.]
                
                
                    
                        Finding the Middle Ground Between "Determinism" and "Aesthetic
                            Indeterminacy": A Model for Text Analysis Tools
                        John Bradley
                        
                            In Danielle Miller's review of the book The Legacy
                                    of Northrop Frye, she notes Imre Salusinsky's
                                observation that the textual theorist is the "true liberal who
                                positions himself in the middle ground between 'determinism' and
                                'aesthetic indeterminacy'". Over the past several years I have
                                proposed a model for text analysis tools that balances the ability
                                of the computer to carry out a set of formal tasks on a text against
                                the need of the human user to introduce rather more
                                non-deterministic material into an analysis. Although it is meant to
                                reflect a view on some aspects of how a text is analyzed that is not
                                specifically "computer based", it is also based on certain
                                developments in the computing world over the past several years, and
                                on developments in software in a sister field to the humanities: the
                                social sciences. The model is based on XML, and more specifically
                                TEI -- surely a solid foundation upon which text analysis tools
                                should be built. It, however, goes against several of the current
                                developments in XML -- turning, instead, to a view of XML that is, I
                                think, truer to the thinking behind TEI than these current
                                developments.
                            The World Wide Web, with its model of servers and clients, often
                                dominates thinking about the role of computers in certain groups
                                within the computing humanities community. In the web, the server
                                has a resource that can be made available to a community of users --
                                the clients. The nature of browser-based interaction means that the
                                user can use the web to select displays of results, and can also
                                take advantage of search engines that a
                                server might make available -- posing a query through a form which
                                allows the server machine to select material from the resource to be
                                presented. In the Humanities, then, the WWW encourages the view of
                                scholarly materials as a resource that
                                the WWW makes available to a collection of scholars -- no wonder,
                                perhaps, that conferences like the UK's Digital
                                    Resources in the Humanities have begun to appear.
                            The nature of the server/client interaction in the WWW is
                                transactional. A user sends a request (either in the form of a
                                request for a page of material, or in the form of a query), and the
                                server sends back a response. Not surprisingly, given that XML came
                                from the W3C -- setters of standards for the WWW -- there have been
                                a flurry of activities that are based on XML that support this
                                transactional model of interaction. Standards like W3C's SOAP (which
                                is XML based) work best in a what in computing is called a
                                "peer-to-peer" context: where a computer system belonging to one
                                organisation (say a purchasing system) needs to send an order to a
                                peer machine in another (say, supplier) organisation.
                            The transactional model is of course appropriate for certain kinds of
                                humanities resources. In many kinds of linguistics-based work, for
                                example, it is often sensible to view a corpus as a resource to be
                                queried. However, this model does not suit other aspects of the
                                traditional model of humanities scholarship nearly so well. Indeed,
                                the TEI, originally developed before the WWW was available, takes
                                quite a different, and much more intimate, view of the relationship
                                between the user and his/her text. In the TEI's "analytic mechanism"
                                and related schemes such as "feature structures" one sees an attempt
                                to express in SGML (and nowadays XML) connections between text and
                                analysis that are tightly connected to the text itself in that they
                                rely on the insertion of markup by the scholar directly onto the
                                text base. This kind of activity is not so much like the
                                transactional model, which would have the scholar interacting with a
                                text as a remote resource, but instead should be thought of as being
                                closer to a form of ownership -- the scholar gradually makes some
                                aspect of the text his/her own by attaching material ("annotations")
                                that represent her/his personal interests onto a text.
                            I believe there is some evidence to suggest that this "enrichment
                                model" is closer to the interaction between a scholar and his/her
                                text and provides a better model for computer support of humanities
                                scholarship than the transactional one does. During the presentation
                                of this paper we will examine Willard McCarty's "Analytical
                                Onomasticon to the Metamorphoses of Ovid" as an example of textual
                                enrichment. The Onomasticon represents a blending of traditional
                                annotation with computer processing which helps to reveal and assist
                                in the imposition of a unified, yet rich, vision of personification
                                on the text. McCarty's recent analysis of the commentary also
                                proposes a model for the digital commentary in which an enrichment
                                approach is implicit. Furthermore, there are useful models to
                                examine in the social sciences, where there has been the blossoming
                                of tools to provide computer assistance to the kind of textual
                                analysis that is often needed for their texts (e.g. interviews).
                            Particularly interesting in this regard are the packages Nud*ist, NVivo
                                and Atlas.ti, all tools that suggest
                                some characteristics of enrichment that would suit humanities
                                scholarship as well.
                            Tools to support textual enrichment have been available for some
                                time, and some of them are remarkably powerful. TuStep, for example,
                                has its origins in the 1970s -- predating even SGML -- and provides
                                an integrated set of tools to support a broad range of scholarly
                                activities. Much more recently, the "EyeContact" model, proposed by
                                Geoffrey Rockwell and me, operates in a broadly similar fashion --
                                emphasising a set of tools that can process text and text-related
                                materials, and that can be combined in many ways. I have come to
                                believe, however, that the enrichment model is better served when
                                the emphasis provided by the environment to the user is on viewing
                                of the text and scholarly annotations rather than on the task of
                                assembling of the tools to do work. Thus, it seems to me that
                                "XML/SGML editors" such as XMetal or emacs/psgml provide a good
                                starting point for envisaging a model of what is needed. They are at
                                least aware of XML/SGML constructs and can assist with ensuring
                                XML/SGML conformity. However, on their own they cannot help the user
                                much if s/he tries to introduce one of TEI's more sophisticated
                                analytic mechanism models onto a text -- the TEI guidelines
                                themselves suggest that there is a need for software beyond an
                                XML-aware text editor to facilitate the introduction of the
                                analytical models that they propose. It is in the combining of XML
                                structures (already understood by XML editors) with software objects
                                more closely related to the scholarly tools being modeled that
                                development work would need to be done.
                            The development of software that supports an enrichment model of text
                                is supported by some developments that are XML based. Many of these
                                standards are still in their early days and are as of yet, from an
                                enrichment perspective, hobbled by the transactional focus of the
                                members of the committees that develop them, since they are tailored
                                first to meet the needs of those who process relatively short,
                                relatively simple XML documents that characterise transactional
                                processing. Standards such as XLink -- arising as it does out of
                                HyTime, provides one starting point, and perhaps because of its
                                origin, is less specific to transactional-based work. XSLT and XSL's
                                formatting objects provide another starting point, and the DOM
                                provides a third. A serious development effort, based on these
                                standards, could be undertaken, but I believe one would find that in
                                the end further enhancement of them to more closely match the
                                complex needs of modeling within the humanities would be needed.
                        
                    
                    
                        References
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Melina
                                            Alexa
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Cornelia
                                            Zuell
                                        
                                    
                                    A Review of Software for Text Analysis
                                    
                                        Manneheim
                                        ZUMA
                                        2000
                                    
                                
                                ISBN 3-924220-16-6
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            John
                                            Bradley
                                        
                                    
                                    Tools to augment scholarly activity: an
                                        architecture to support text analysis
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Dino
                                            Buzzetti
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Giuliano
                                            Pancaldi
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Harold
                                            Short
                                        
                                    
                                    Augmenting Comprehension: Digital Tools (and
                                        Resources) for the History of Science and Philosophy; Papers
                                        from the conference "Informatica umanistica: filosofia e
                                        risorse digitali" (Bologna, September 2000)
                                    
                                        
                                        OHC: Oxford and King's College London
                                        forthcoming, expected 2002
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Willard
                                            McCarty
                                         et al 
                                    An Analytical Onomasticon to the Metamorphoses
                                        of Ovid
                                    (Online Sampler 29/8/99)
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Willard
                                            McCarty
                                        
                                    
                                    The DIY commentary; or, what the reference and
                                        the link told each other
                                
                                
                                    from Paper for ACH/ALLC 2001 New York
                                        University 14 June 2001
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        2001
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Geoffrey
                                            Rockwell
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            John
                                            Bradley
                                        
                                    
                                    Eye-ConTact: Towards a New Design for Research
                                        Text Tools
                                
                                
                                    Computing in the Humanities Working Papers
                                    
                                        A
                                        4
                                        
                                        February 1998
                                    
                                
                                This online refereed journal is located at: URL:
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Toward an Algorithmic Criticism
                        Stephen Ramsay
                        
                            There is a left-hand tradition in literary analysis which most
                                literary critics think of as incompatible with mainstream scholarly
                                activity. That tradition manifests itself in Hebrew gematria and in
                                the bibliomancy of the ancient Chinese; in the anti-art poetics of
                                the Dadaists and the algorithmic writing of the Oulipo; in Ferdinand
                                de Saussure's secret quest for anagrams in Saturnian poetry and in
                                Emily Dickinson's injunction to read her poems backwards, so that "a
                                certain Something overtakes the mind." These traditions are often
                                deliberately anarchic, mystical, and even irrational in their
                                approach to the text. Instead of the hermeneutics of illumination,
                                in which the goal is some clear statement of meaning or an unfolding
                                of the truth, this tradition asserts the hermeneutics of play.
                            That this tradition should seem so far afield from the normative
                                practices of literary exegesis is itself revelatory of certain
                                distinctive features of the illuminative mode. Literary criticism
                                asserts a rhetoric of explanation intended to reveal both the
                                internal and extrinsic logic--the meaning--of a textual artifact;
                                the more ancient ludic traditions deemphasize this aspect of
                                hermeneutics, often relinquishing this rhetoric entirely, content
                                simply to let alternative formations exist without the scaffolding
                                of explicit interpretation.
                            But these types of interpretive activities, in which one proceeds
                                from text to playful reordering and "refactoring" (to borrow a term
                                from software engineering) to interpretation, only serve to make
                                manifest a progression that is always at work in literary critical
                                method, even when the dominant rhetorics of interpretation attempt
                                to conceal the playfulness beneath. In order to create and
                                communicate meaning, the critic must remap, reenvision, and re-form
                                (even "deform" it, as Jerome McGann and Lisa Samuels have suggested)
                                into some alternate arrangement. In essence, one must create the
                                text anew in order to illuminate the original.
                            There is also a right-hand tradition in literary analysis which most
                                literary critics think of as preinterpretive or else unallied with
                                the real work of generating critical interpretation. That tradition
                                manifests itself in programs which display search results; in Busa's
                                Index Thomisticus and in concordancing software; in statistical
                                analysis of word frequency distributions and in the algorithms of
                                authorship attribution. Instead of the hermeneutics of play, in
                                which the goal is simply to facilitate engagement and enable
                                insight, these traditions assert the hermeneutics of the algorithm.
                            These types of interpretive activities have always possessed the
                                sheen of scientism--a feature which practitioners of text analysis
                                have sometimes emphasized and sometimes deemphasized as the tools
                                have moved across the disciplines and in and out of academic
                                fashions. Yet it may be argued that its closest family resemblance
                                lies not with conventional literary criticism, but with its ludic
                                cousin. The algorithmic analysis of text may be thought of as
                                lending a positivistic slant to critical activity, but it may just
                                as easily be thought of as yet another critical practice at the
                                interstices of work and interpretation--a critical act of
                                deformation, neither mystical nor anarchic, and yet invested with
                                the same power to facilitate engagement and enable insight.
                            Both the ludic and scientistic traditions of interpretive activity
                                exist on the margins of literary critical practice. Mainstream
                                literary critical culture tends to consign the former to the realm
                                of literary artifact while viewing algorithmic criticism as merely
                                part of the pre-interpretive organizations deemed necessary for
                                certain limited types of analysis. In this way, the Muse and the
                                mathematician each abut the boundaries of a central position
                                (mainstream literary critical practice) which is too rational for
                                the former and too mysterious for the latter. As long as the work
                                generated by these tools is perceived as pre-interpretive--or worse,
                                positivistic--humanities computing in literary studies will continue
                                to operate outside of mainstream discussions in the discipline.
                            I would like to suggest that we reenvision text analysis from the
                                theoretical standpoint of the ludic tradition--envisioning
                                computer-assisted text analysis in literary studies as
                                preinterpretive in the strong sense of exploration and play.
                                Reforming and refactoring to enable insight, notice aspects, and
                                reveal codes.
                            I have developed a set of software components intended to demonstrate
                                these principles called the D-Machines. The D-Machines consist of a
                                set of program modules that allow one to perform discrete
                                deformations of text: e.g. print backwards and forwards, switch
                                gender terms, colorize word frequencies, show only nouns or only
                                verbs, and so on. I will demonstrate this system and show how it may
                                be used to enact the principles I have set forth concerning the
                                reconception of text analysis as an activity which participates in
                                the creation of those alternative textualities which undergird all
                                literary critical acts.
                        
                    
                    
                        References
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Jerome
                                            J.
                                            McGann
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Lisa
                                            Samuels
                                        
                                    
                                    Deformance and Interpretation
                                
                                
                                    New Literary History
                                    
                                        30
                                        1
                                        25-56
                                        1999
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Warren
                                            F.
                                            Motte
                                        
                                    
                                    OuLiPo: A Primer of Potential Literature
                                    
                                        Normal, IL
                                        Dalkey Archive Press
                                        1998
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Raymond
                                            Queneau
                                        
                                    
                                    Cent Mille Milliard de Poems
                                    
                                        Paris
                                        Gallimard
                                        1997
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Jean
                                            Starobinsky
                                        
                                    
                                    Words upon Words: The Anagrams of Ferdinand de
                                        Saussure
                                    
                                        New Haven
                                        Yale UP
                                        1979
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Richard
                                            Rutt
                                        
                                    
                                    The Book of Changes (Zhouyi)
                                    Durham East-Asia Series
                                    
                                        1
                                        Richmond, UK
                                        Curzon
                                        1996
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        What is text analysis, really?
                        Geoffrey Rockwell
                        
                            In a mock confrontation between Allen Renear and Jerome McGann at the
                                ACH/ALLC in 1999 at the University of Virginia, two views as to what
                                a text really is were put forward. Renear put forward, for the sake
                                of the confrontation, the OHCO (ordered hierarchy of content
                                objects) perspective while McGann practiced a view of text as
                                    performance.[1] Susan Hockey, Chair, with Allen
                                    Renear and Jerome J. McGann, Panel: "What is text? A debate on
                                    the philosophical and epistemological nature of text in the
                                    light of humanities computing research", ACH-ALLC, June 9-13
                                    1999, at the University of Virginia. In the context of a
                                humanities computing conference this confrontation was designed to
                                highlight the relationship between theories of text and ways of
                                representing texts digitally. Renear's Platonic view of the text as
                                a real abstract OHCO fits nicely with the dominant practice for the
                                digital representation of texts, namely the guidelines of the TEI.
                                McGann instead gave us an example of a reading that was both a
                                performance itself and pointed to the (hypertextual) links within
                                and around the text. McGann's challenge to Renear was to show how a
                                reading of a text both was the text and could not be captured by an
                                OCHO. The confrontation succinctly opened again the question of the
                                relationship between how we represent texts, how we use them, and
                                our theories of textuality.
                            What does this have to do with literary text analysis and computing?
                                What was not made clear in the confrontation was the role of the
                                tools we use for accessing and manipulating digital texts; tools
                                which I will call text analysis tools. If we are to take McGann's
                                public performance of a reading as an analogue for what we wish to
                                achieve digitally, we have to think not just about how we represent
                                the text but also about analysis and the tools that are used to
                                perform the analysis on a computer. The logic of the tools, despite
                                (or because of) their tendency to become transparent in use, can
                                enhance or constrain different types of reading which in turn makes
                                them a better or worse fit for practices of literary criticism.
                            Another way of saying this is that we have a model of
                                computer-assisted literary text analysis that is guided by a view of
                                what a text is and how we should use it that does not match the
                                practice of many contemporary literary critics. (It should be noted
                                that this is not true in the field of computational linguistics and
                                may not be true in literary criticism in the future). Consequently,
                                as others have pointed out, text analysis tools and the practices of
                                literary computer analysis have not had the anticipated impact on
                                the research community. This is often blamed on the absence of
                                easy-to-use tools, especially tools that take advantage of OCHO, but
                                I will argue in this paper that there are two other issues that have
                                to be taken into account. First, the tools we have (and even those
                                we anticipate) have emerged out of a particular critical tradition
                                that I will call an "editorial" tradition going back to tools for
                                editors of concordances. To understand the current state of text
                                analysis tools we need to review their history in terms of the
                                practices they complement and the theories of textual practice they
                                augment. Second, I will argue that the moment when humanities
                                computing could have an impact on literary criticism through the
                                provision of critical tools (and relevant theories of what computer
                                based text analysis) is passing as server-based text access tools
                                that provide access to licensed digital archives seem to satisfy
                                most of our colleagues while we keep on imagining personal tools. In
                                other words, we will soon be Googled out of theoretical relevance -
                                the text tools developed outside the scholarly community (for
                                digital library access) may prove a closer fit to the practices of
                                our colleagues than our elaborate analytical tools.
                            While I doubt we can resist the commercial forces that lead to the
                                bundling of limited tools and texts, we can understand this process
                                in terms of its relevance to the practices of our colleagues and
                                imagine an alternative that is relevant to contemporary literary
                                criticism. This paper will therefore conclude with (yet another)
                                proposal for a model for text analysis tools, a portal model. The
                                portal model provides us a way of taking advantage of the trend away
                                from personal tools towards community tools while also engaging a
                                different critical practice of playful criticism. The theory of
                                analysis illustrated is in a hermeneutical tradition which
                                incorporates play in method and which is best expressed in the work
                                of Gadamer. A portal for text analysis can finesse the problems of
                                ease-of-use while also providing a virtual play-pen for contemporary
                                critics to try computer-assisted techniques beyond those provided by
                                the commercial publishers of e-texts. The portal ironically could be
                                the backdoor through which our colleagues could be introduced to the
                                playful work of humanities computing.
                            That said, we should be honest and admit that much of our discourse
                                around tools is for our own sake. It is our humanities computing
                                play with tools and texts. Does it matter if anyone else ever uses
                                these tools as long as they help us understand the practice of
                                reading digital representations? The portal prototype to be
                                demonstrated, while it may have practical applications, is for
                                humanities computing an attempt to illustrate a particular
                                relationship between a theory of texts and analysis on the one hand
                                and an interface for text analysis that implements that theory on
                                the other hand.
                            In conclusion, this paper will do the following:
                                    1. Present a short history of text analysis tools as they
                                        evolved from batch concording tools to server-based digital
                                        library access tools. This history will focus on the
                                        relationship between the form of the tools with the
                                        practices they enabled.
                                    2. Present an alternative definition of analysis building
                                        on Gadamer's hermeneutics of play.
                                    3. Demonstrate a text-analysis portal prototype that is
                                        designed to enable playful practice.
                                
                        
                    
                    
                        Bibliography
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            J.
                                            Bradley
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            G.
                                            Rockwell
                                        
                                    
                                    Watching Scepticism: Computer Assisted
                                        Visualization and Hume's Dialogues 
                                
                                
                                    Research in Humanities Computing
                                    
                                        5
                                        Oxford
                                        Clarendon Press
                                        1996
                                        32-47
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Hans-Georg
                                            Gadamer
                                        
                                    
                                    Truth and Method
                                    
                                        Trans.
                                        
                                            W.
                                            Glen-Doepel
                                        
                                    
                                    2nd ed.
                                    
                                        New York
                                        Crossroad
                                        1985
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Johan
                                            Huizinga
                                        
                                    
                                    Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in
                                        Culture
                                    
                                        Boston
                                        Beacon Press
                                        1950
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            I.
                                            Lancashire
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            J.
                                            Bradley
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            W.
                                            McCarty
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            M.
                                            Stairs
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            T.
                                            R.
                                            Wooldridge
                                        
                                    
                                    Using TACT with Electronic Texts
                                    
                                        New York
                                        The Modern Language Association of America
                                        1996
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            R.
                                            G.
                                            Potter
                                        
                                    
                                    Literary Criticism and Literary Computing: The
                                        Difficulties of a Synthesis
                                
                                
                                    Computers and the Humanities
                                    
                                        22
                                        2
                                        91-97
                                        1988
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            G.
                                            Rockwell
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            J.
                                            Bradley
                                        
                                    
                                    Eye-ConTact:Towards a New Design for Research
                                        Text Tools
                                
                                
                                    Computing in the Humanities Working Papers
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        1998
                                    
                                
                                URL: . Also at URL: .
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            G.
                                            Rockwell
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            J.
                                            Bradley
                                        
                                    
                                    Empreintes dans le sable: Visualisation
                                        scientifique et analyse de texte
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            A.
                                            Vuillemin
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            M.
                                            LeNoble
                                        
                                    
                                    Litterature, informatique, lecture
                                    
                                        Paris
                                        Pulim
                                        1999
                                        130-160
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            G.
                                            Rockwell
                                        
                                    
                                    The Visual Concordance: The Design of
                                        Eye-ConTact
                                
                                
                                    Text Technology
                                    
                                        10
                                        1
                                        73-86
                                        2001
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Computer-Assisted Text Exploration
                        Stéfan Sinclair
                        
                            
                                
                                    Mon plaisir peut très bien prendre la forme d'une dérive.
                                        La dérive advient chaque fois que je ne respecte pas le
                                        tout, et qu'à force de paraître emporté ici et là au gré des
                                        illusions, séductions et intimidations de langage, tel un
                                        bouchon sur la vague, je reste immobile, pivotant sur la
                                        jouissance intraitable qui me lie au texte.
                                    -- Roland Barthes, Le Plaisir du
                                        texte
                                
                            
                            Existing text-analysis tools can be very useful if one knows what
                                questions to ask (and how to ask them). In general, they presuppose
                                a researcher who has read a text, who has formulated some questions
                                about it, who then sets the text aside while using analysis tools to
                                attempt to answer the questions (with a text in electronic form that
                                is rarely viewable in its entirety). Thus, data completely displaces
                                the text, at least temporarily, as the object/objective of study in
                                text-analysis.
                            Etymologically, analysis denotes breaking something up or loosening
                                it. Computer-assisted text-analysis tools have fully exploited the
                                flexible, digital nature of the electronic medium to allow texts to
                                be segmented in innumerable ways. It has proven far trickier to
                                reconstitute the divided parts into meaningful units, in large part
                                because this step depends on an interpretive intention that is
                                beyond the capabilities of current tools. Connotatively, analysis
                                includes this interpretive or synthetic phase that completes the
                                circle of segmentation and unification, but text-analysis tools have
                                historically stranded the literary critic at the half-way, base arc,
                                part of the process (though many imaginative and resourceful
                                colleagues have made their own way back up).
                            The computer need not manifest signs of intelligence to play a role
                                in completing the analytic process, it need only help the critic do
                                so. One fairly simple strategy for this is to create paths from the
                                data (segmented text) back to the integral text. That functionality
                                was precisely the motivation behind the creation of the first
                                version of HyperPo, an online text-analysis and exploration tool
                                (see &lt;&gt;). HyperPo can generate many of the usual types of data in
                                text-analysis, such as frequency, collocation and distribution
                                lists, but it can also create links from those data back to the
                                text, displaying both simultaneously (see Sinclair 1997 and 1998 for
                                more details on these functions). As such, HyperPo can break down a
                                text into constitutive parts and do comparative analyses, but it can
                                also reconstitute a text from any of those parts.
                            Because there is a high degree of speculation and experimentation
                                involved, I have found it more useful to view such decomposing and
                                recomposing methods less as analysis and more as exploration. I
                                navigate through the text and data the way one might explore the
                                streets of an unknown city or the trails in an expansive parkland;
                                various things along the way may prompt me to change directions, and
                                though I often don't know where I am going, I know that I am somehow
                                accumulating a broader representation of the terrain.
                            The notion of text-analysis as exploration has recently led me to
                                develop some more adventurous functions for HyperPo (functions that
                                may not be available at the above web address until August 2002).
                                These new functions are less concerned with the immediate analysis
                                of a text and more concerned with multiplying the means for its
                                traversal, its discovery, and enjoyment (perhaps even Roland
                                Barthes' jouissance). Playing with a text may not contribute
                                directly to its analysis, but I believe it can contribute to its
                                appreciation and perhaps its understanding (in ways that might be
                                next to impossible to measure). As Malcolm McCullough states in a
                                manner that is fully compatible to the development of a literary
                                interpretation: "play often lacks any immediately obvious aim, other
                                than the pursuit of stimulation, but functions almost instinctively
                                to serve the process of development" (223).
                            Like HyperPo itself (HYPERtexte POtentiel), the new functions are
                                inspired by the work of the Oulipo (OUvroir de LIttérature
                                POtentielle; see &lt;&gt;
                                for more information on this group). Interestingly, the Oulipo
                                divides its activities (in characteristically ironic terms) between
                                "l'analoupisme" (the analytic) and "le synthoulipisme" (the
                                synthetic) and states that "the synthetic branch is more ambitious;
                                it is the primary vocation of the Oulipo. It is a matter of opening
                                to our predecessors new and unexplored ways" (17, my translation).
                                Such are my ambitions too.
                        
                    
                    
                        References
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Roland
                                            Barthes
                                        
                                    
                                    Le Plaisir du texte
                                    
                                        Paris
                                        Seuil
                                        1973
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Malcolm
                                            McCullough
                                        
                                    
                                    Abstracting Craft: The Practiced Digital Hand
                                    
                                        Cambridge, MA
                                        MIT Press
                                        1996
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Oulipo
                                    
                                    La Littérature potentielle
                                    
                                        Paris
                                        Gallimard
                                        1973
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Stéfan
                                            Sinclair
                                        
                                    
                                    HyperPo: The Next Generation
                                
                                
                                    ACH-ALLC '99 Conference Proceedings
                                    
                                        Virginia
                                        University of Virginia
                                        1999
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Stéfan
                                            Sinclair
                                        
                                    
                                    L'HyperPo: Exploration des structures lexicales
                                        à l'aide des formes hypertextuelles
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Greg
                                            Lessard
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Michael
                                            Levison
                                        
                                    
                                    ACH-ALLC '97 Conference Abstracts
                                    
                                        Kingston, ON
                                        Queen's University Press
                                        1997
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
