


    
        
            
                Towards a Rhetoric of Hypertext: A Case Study in
                    Adaptive Literature
                
                    
                        Licia
                        Calvi
                        
                            Technical University of Eindhoven
                            l.calvi@tue.nl
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                In hypertext poetics, great importance is assigned to the notion of a
                    decentralization of the authorial voice [7]: the author is said to gradually
                    loose her power and authority within the hypertextual work, whereas the reader
                    gains more centrality and control over the text and over the ways to navigate it
                    and ultimately to construct the narrative.
                By introducing a distinction between shallow text
                    (i.e., what appears on the screen, and therefore what the reader actually reads)
                    and deep text (the encoded text that generates what
                    will appear on the screen), Lughi [8] ultimately reduces the space of
                    applicability of the above-mentioned construct: the reader's freedom is heavily
                    conditioned and determined by the author, whose space of activity lies at the
                    level of the deep text. So the author, by acting on and controlling the deep
                    text, eventually limits the reading possibilities offered to the reader. This is
                    possible because (and I may add, if) the author directly acts on the code behind
                    the shallow text. This intervention may take different forms and open up a wide
                    space for the author's experimental efforts and creativity.
                In this open space, adaptive hypermedia (AH) may play a significant role.
                So far, adaptive hypermedia have mainly been used as a didactic tool, i.e., as a
                    tool to develop on-line educational systems, despite the potentially wider
                    spectrum of systems they could be applied to (see in [1]). A restriction that
                    adaptive educational systems soon showed was their application domain: most
                    systems were used to teach computer science related or anyway scientific
                    disciplines. Attempts at extending this limitation have been made, for instance
                    by using adaptive hypermedia to teach foreign languages [2]. But the results
                    obtained were not always so promising for the intrinsic difficulty at modeling
                    such a domain: at a linguistic level (syntax and semantics), at a domain-related
                    level (in the perspective of a situated learning approach to language learning),
                    and at a level that was focusing on the intersection between the previous
                    two.
                What has been neglected so far is however the possibility of using AH for the
                    humanities, again not just as a didactic device, rather as a medium to promote
                    advances in or to be applied to humanities disciplines. Although, recently, a
                    research trend has emerged which has pointed out the potential advantages of
                    exploiting adaptive methodologies to the delivery of cultural information, which
                    have a direct influence on the way in which cultural heritage information is
                    approached, accessed and fruited, not as much has been devoted to promote the
                    production of artistic artifacts by means of AH. At a closer look, the
                    contamination of art and technology is historically older than what the last
                    years of Web explosion may seem to suggest: at the end of the nineteenth
                    century, for instance, Rimbaud's fascination for photography was influencing his
                    poetical style in determining which words to select, how to construct sentences,
                    and how to juxtapose them in a visually effective way (see, for instance, in
                    [3]). In this sense, AH should be considered as the canvas whose characteristics
                    can influence the final artistic result in a peculiar way. A first step in this
                    direction has however already been made: it is the system developed by Kendall
                    and Réty [6], the Connection System. This system allows to write literature,
                    both poetry and fiction, adaptively.
                On the basis of the previous discussion, this paper intends to pursue a dual
                    goal: on the one hand, it intends to analyze a number of existing digital
                    hyperfictions to extrapolate their characteristics, to investigate the amount of
                    experimental composition and the kind of creativity that they allow to authors,
                    to stretch and explore the limits both in the language and in the tool (the
                    hypertext), in order to elaborate ultimately a rhetoric of hypertext. On the
                    other hand, on the basis of the results obtained by this analysis, the paper
                    will present an extension of the AHA! system [5], as augmented to include these
                    derived elements. AHA! is an application developed at the Eindhoven University
                    of Technology to deliver adaptive Web-based courses. Up to now, it has been used
                    to design and develop educational courses (mainly in the field of Computer
                    Science, but also in the Humanities [3] and an experimental course in CALL) and
                    only recently for e-commerce applications.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                     Brusilovsky
                                
                            
                            Methods and Techniques of Adaptive Hypermedia
                        
                        
                            User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction
                            
                                6
                                
                                87—129
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    L.
                                    Calvi
                                
                            
                            On the Formative Evaluation of CALLware
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Brusilovsky
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    O.
                                    Stock
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Strapparava
                                
                            
                            Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-Based Systems,
                                Proceedings of the AH’00 Conference
                            Lecture Notes in Computer Science
                            
                                
                                Springer-Verlag
                                2000
                                276—279
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    L.
                                    Calvi
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    L.
                                    Goedemé
                                
                            
                            ‘Hyperlectures’: Teaching Postmodern Culture on the
                                Web
                        
                        
                            poster presented at the Joint International Conference
                                of the Association For Literary and of the Linguistic Computing and
                                Association For Computers and The Humanities, Glasgow, 22-25 July
                                2000
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                M.
                                Costa
                            
                        
                        L’estetica dei media. Avanguardie e tecnologia
                        
                            
                            Castelvecchi
                            1999
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            P.
                                De Bra
                            L.Calvi
                            AHA! An open Adaptive Hypermedia Architecture
                        
                        
                            The New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia
                            
                                4
                                
                                115-139
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            R.
                               Kendall
                            J.H.Réty
                            Toward an Organic Hypertext
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of Hypertext ’00
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                                161—170
                            
                        
                        
                        
                            
                                G.
                                Lughi
                            
                        
                            Parole on line. Dall’ipertesto all’editoria multimediale
                        
                            
                            Guerini e Associati
                            2001
                        
                        
                
            
        
    
