


    
        
            
                Multiple Architectures and Multiple Media: The Salem
                    Witch Trials and Boston's Back Bay Fens Projects
                
                    
                        Daniel
                        V.
                        Pitti
                        
                            Institute for Advanced Technology in the
                            Humanities, University of Virginia
                            dpitti@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Chris
                        Jessee
                        
                            Institute for Advanced Technology in the
                            Humanities, University of Virginia
                            cj8n@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Stephen
                        Ramsay
                        
                            Institute for Advanced Technology in the
                            Humanities, University of Virginia
                            sjra@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    The Salem Witch Trials and Boston's Back Bay Fens Projects have been under
                        development at the Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities
                        (IATH) since July 1999. Professor Ben Ray of the Religious Studies
                        Department leads The Salem Witch Trials project. Kathy Poole, a professor in
                        the School of Architecture at the time of the award, leads Boston's Back Bay
                        Fens project.
                    While the two projects have distinctly different subject matter and
                        objectives, they have in common an historical perspective and analysis, and
                        the use of interrelated geographic, social, documentary, and interpretive
                        data and information. Specific challenges involved identifying the key
                        "objects of interest;" analysis of their nature and characteristics;
                        identification of appropriate representation architectures and development
                        of appropriate models and implementations; and finally, interrelating the
                        diverse architectures to fulfill the pedagogical and research objectives of
                        each project. Three papers will be presented describing both the
                        intellectual and technological methods employed in the design and
                        implementation of these two projects.
                    "Data Diversity and Integration in Two Socio-Cultural Historical Research
                        Projects" will provide an overview of each project. In particular, it will
                        describe the people (faculty, student, and staff) involved and the essential
                        research and pedagogical objectives of each project, the analytic methods
                        employed to identify the essential intellectual components and appropriate
                        representational architectures for each, the data and textual schemas
                        developed, and the overarching relational architecture that integrates the
                        diverse, data specific architectures. Each project comprises relational
                        database, XML textual documents (both documentary and interpretative),
                        pictorial material, geographic information, and real-time dynamically
                        created XML data instances used to integrate the various architectures, and
                        data structures and content.
                    "Flash GIS: Delivering Geographic Information on the Internet," using
                        examples from the Salem Witch Trials and Boston's Back Bay Fens, will
                        discuss the challenge of delivering geographic information on the Internet
                        for the humanities researcher. Current GIS-to-web solutions have the benefit
                        of being easy to use and fast to deploy if their features and functionality
                        meet project requirements. However, if the research requires high quality
                        display, animation, a custom interface, or advanced interactivity, these
                        systems will be inadequate. Combining the high quality vector display of
                        Flash with an SQL database, the Institute has developed a system which it
                        has named "Flash GIS." This system offers the extensibility and
                        functionality needed to handle complex geographic relationships. The Flash
                        plug-in was designed to display animated advertising in a web browser, but
                        it is broad and general in function, and thus can be applied to a range of
                        humanities data visualization problems.
                    "Relational Ontologies and the New Historicism," will discuss the opportunity
                        offered by these two projects to think about the ways in which computer
                        technology can assist historians in effecting the union of macro- and micro-
                        historiographic methods. Both projects employ schema with conventional
                        records, but enrich that record set with an extremely rich relational
                        ontology that can capture the complex relationships between divergent record
                        types. This paper discusses the ways in which the system uses those
                        relational junctions to bring forth the micro-narratives implicit in the
                        data--narratives that were perhaps beyond the view of any individual
                        researcher entering data into the database. This paper also presents the
                        Sibelius libraries (a set of generic Java classes for rendering database
                        relationships), and goes on to propose several possibilities for more
                        elaborate data visualizations.
                
                
                    
                        Data Diversity and Integration in Two Socio-Cultural Historical
                            Research Projects
                        Daniel V. Pitti
                        
                            Each year the Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities
                                awards a two- year fellowships for computer-assisted research in the
                                humanities to a member of the humanities faculty at the University
                                of Virginia. The selection committee evaluates proposals based on
                                the merit of content and on innovative use of computer technology in
                                humanities research. The Salem Witch Trials and Boston's Back Bay
                                Fens projects were awarded fellowships in 1999, under the
                                Institute's early policy of offering two one-year fellowships each
                                year.
                            The Salem Witch Trial project is using computer technology to
                                document, research, and interpret the witch trials that took place
                                between 1692 and 1693 in Salem, Massachusetts. The Boston's Back Bay
                                Fens project is using computer technology to document, research, and
                                interpret the history of the infrastructure of Boston's Back Bay
                                Fens park and surrounding area from 1878 until the present.
                            While the two projects differ significantly in the subjects being
                                investigated, we can characterize each as an historical, social, and
                                cultural study. The similarities in methodology and the related
                                focus on social and cultural phenomena in a bounded space and time
                                lead to similar computer data representations and architectures.
                            At the outset of each project, the faculty researchers leading each
                                project began a series of meetings with Institute faculty and staff,
                                and graduate students assisting the projects. The goals of these
                                meetings are to analyze the objectives of each project, to identify
                                the resources and relations among them required to meet the
                                objectives, to identify the appropriate computer architectures for
                                representing the resources and meeting the research objectives, and,
                                finally, to develop appropriate, detailed representational schemas.
                                Both projects utilize a wide variety of both primary and secondary
                                resources. While many of these resources are textual in nature, many
                                represent a variety of other forms: geographic information,
                                pictorial and other graphic materials, as well as social and
                                cultural data extracted from primary resources and represented.
                            A central challenge in all projects at the Institute is identifying
                                the central "objects of interests." Objects of interest comprise
                                both the key artifacts and resources that constitute the core
                                evidence under study, as well as the people, places, things, and
                                events documented in these resources. While the resources and the
                                various social, cultural, and political entities they document are
                                of primary importance, the relations among them are equally
                                important.
                            Both projects employ relational databases at the center of their
                                architectures. The Salem Witch Trials database has primary tables
                                representing people (accusers, accused, witnesses, and the like),
                                organizations or corporate bodies (including courts, juries,
                                households, and town, church, and legal officials), legal and
                                judicial events (accusations, arrests, trials, convictions,
                                executions, and the like), public and private buildings and
                                structures (court houses, homes, and so on), and bibliographic
                                resources (court records and other documentary evidence, critical
                                early and modern secondary resources, pictorial materials, maps,
                                derived and original digital materials, and so on). Many of the
                                materials described in bibliographic records in the database are the
                                sources for describing the individuals, organizations, events, and
                                structures represented in the databases.
                            Each primary table defines a set of descriptive attributes for each
                                object. In turn, each object represented in a primary table is
                                related to each of the others in a variety of ways through secondary
                                tables. People, for example, are related through secondary tables
                                from which family structures can be dynamically derived. Families,
                                in turn, are related to households, which encompass broader
                                relations than families. Families, further, are related to houses,
                                which are also related to specific geographic information locating
                                them in space, as well as in time. In this manner, people,
                                organizations, structures, events, and resources function as
                                primitives that, when interrelated, comprise more complex structures
                                serving particular research and analytic objectives.
                            Boston's Back Bay Fens has five primary tables: people, organizations
                                or corporate bodies, events, objects or structures, and
                                bibliographic resources. While the primary tables are remarkably
                                similar to the tables in Salem Witch Trials tables, there is only
                                some overlap in the attributes associated with each object. The
                                differences in attributes primarily reflect differences in the
                                nature of the disciplines (religious studies and history of
                                architecture) and the nature of the objects and relations being
                                investigated. The primary objects identified and the attributes
                                identified and associated with them reflect the disciplinary
                                methodology employed, and assumptions about which phenomenon will
                                lead to furthering our understanding. In essence, the entities
                                represented in each primary table and the relations between them in
                                secondary tables reflect the hypothetical assumptions of each
                                researcher.
                            The information represented in the databases is extracted from a
                                variety of primary and secondary resources. The latter category
                                includes both second and first generation digital materials.
                                Decisions concerning the appropriate architectures and
                                representations of the primary and secondary resources required
                                additional analysis, though not independent of the analysis and
                                design of the databases. The entities represented in the database
                                are necessarily related to the documentary and secondary sources,
                                and these relations must necessarily be maintained. Maintaining
                                these relations requires identifying and representing in both the
                                database representations and the representations of the resources
                                machine-readable data facilitating correlations.
                            Given the historical nature of each project, spatial and temporal
                                orientation of the people and organizations that play significant
                                roles, the natural and cultural objects that coexist with them, and
                                the events that reveal significant relations among them, become of
                                critical importance. Geographic and temporal information thus plays
                                a critical role in each of these projects. We can characterize
                                existing Geographic Information Systems (GIS) as generally dealing
                                with change over time through a series of static maps linked to
                                relatively flat structures representing the data being plotted
                                through time and space. Both of these projects, however, wanted to
                                be able to display (visualize?) people, objects, and events in
                                geographic space and through time dynamically. This presented the
                                challenge of not merely re-presenting maps as images or even GIS,
                                but representing geographic information in relation to entities
                                represented in the respective databases. The data in the databases
                                is used "to drive" dynamic temporal-geographic displays.
                            Each project also had to consider the representation of texts,
                                pictorial and other graphic material. Given past and extensive
                                experience with markup and imaging technologies, texts were not a
                                difficult challenge. Neither project had significant interest in
                                text bearing artifacts as such, or in exploring text or editing
                                theory. Both projects were primarily interested in the information
                                content of texts: reading, searching. In addition to reading and
                                searching, individual texts and people, objects, and events
                                documented in them also had to be represented in a machine-readable
                                manner that would facilitate correlations with entities in the
                                relational databases, and, through them, maps. TEI Lite was chosen
                                as the method for representing texts. Some texts from primary
                                resources are also represented as images, and some texts, where
                                creating machine-readable texts was not deemed necessary or
                                currently economically feasible, are only represented as images.
                            The Salem Witch Trials and the Boston's Back Bay Fens projects are
                                socio- cultural historical studies. While the subject matter in each
                                differs, the similarities in methodology lead to similarities in the
                                phenomenon represented and the methods for representing them. Both
                                projects employ relational databases as axis around which are
                                correlated sophisticated dynamic GIS systems, and resources
                                represented using XML and XML systems, as well other technologies
                                appropriate to the nature of the data and research objectives. While
                                the databases play a central role in the analysis and navigation of
                                the data and resources, XML plays the role of representing texts, as
                                well as integration of the various resources and resource systems
                                employed in the two projects.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Flash GIS: Delivering Geographic Information on the Internet
                        Chris Jessee
                        
                            
                                Overview
                                Delivering geographic information on the Internet is a great
                                    challenge for the humanities researcher. Current GIS-to-web
                                    solutions have the benefit of being easy to use and fast to
                                    deploy if their features and functionality meet your project
                                    requirements. However, if you need high quality display,
                                    animation, a custom interface or advanced interactivity these
                                    systems will be inadequate. Combining the high quality vector
                                    display of Flash with an SQL database, we have developed a
                                    system we call Flash GIS. This system can offer the
                                    extensibility and functionality needed to handle complex
                                    geographic relationships. The Flash plug-in was designed to
                                    display animated advertising in a web browser, but it is broad
                                    and general in function and thus can be applied to a range of
                                    humanities data visualization problems.
                                In order for Flash GIS to move beyond its current
                                    proof-of-concept state and become production ready, automated
                                    conversion of standard GIS file formats to Flash's .swf format
                                    will be needed. If we can overcome this hurdle, Flash's
                                    flexibility and ease of integration with immerging technologies
                                    gives it the potential to be a robust GIS-to-web solution for
                                    humanities research.
                            
                            
                                GIS-to-Web Solutions
                                Slow download, lack of customization and limited animation are
                                    the major problems with current GIS-to-web solutions. Commercial
                                    solutions like ESRI ArcIMS or AutoDesk MapGuide share the same
                                    organizational model: 1) a database, 2) an application server on
                                    a web server and 3) a display engine in the web browser. The
                                    application server functions to negotiate the communication
                                    between the database and the display engine. The display engine
                                    may be as simple as the web browser or as sophisticated as a
                                    Java applet. The display engines vary but provide these common
                                        functions:
                                        Pan and zoom
                                        Show and hide layer or coverage
                                        Cursor location readout of latitude and longitude
                                        Hot linked objects and areas to web resources
                                        Object information rollovers
                                        Printing
                                    
                                If the browser is used as the display engine, all user
                                    interaction requires message passing to the application server,
                                    thus making response times slow. Java applets are large and slow
                                    to download and inherit the poor quality of the Java display
                                    technology. Java applets may not function properly across
                                    multiple platforms and browsers and may not be supported in
                                    future versions of web browsers. Current GIS-to web solutions
                                    use native GIS file formats for storage. Native file formats are
                                    convenient as preprocessing is reduced or eliminated, but their
                                    inefficient structure results in large files sizes. Only limited
                                    tools and functionality for showing change over time or
                                    animation are available in these off-the-shelf systems.
                                    Customization of interactive functions and user interface are
                                    also very limited without extensive programming.
                            
                            
                                Flash GIS
                                With installation on 96 percent of all web browsers, the Flash
                                    player plug-in is a more stable delivery target than the web
                                    browsers themselves. There are hundreds of thousands of Flash
                                    users - far more than all GIS users combined. Although Flash was
                                    designed to deliver animation and advertising, not GIS data, the
                                    ease with which we have re-purposed Flash demonstrates its
                                    flexibility and adaptability to a broad range of display and
                                    data visualization tasks. Flash GIS follows the same
                                    organizational model as commercial GIS-to-web solutions with the
                                    Flash Player plug-in serves as the display engine on the web
                                    browser. We store data in a temporary XML file to reduce server
                                    hits, speed delivery and allow the display to run independent of
                                    the server. When the database contents change, the temporary XML
                                    file is updated to reflect the changes. If the data changes
                                    frequently a direct XML socket connection to the database would
                                    replace the XML temp file. Our configuration is as follows:
                                    PostgreSQL Database > Java Servlet > XML > Flash Player
                                        Plug-in
                                Flash is composed of an authoring environment and a browser
                                    plug-in. Using the plug-in as the GIS display engine and the
                                    authoring environment for tool and interface development
                                    provides significant advantages over commercial GIS-to-web
                                    solutions. Flash offers the following features:
                                        Fast downloads via open, compact, streaming media file
                                            format. (SWF).
                                        High quality vector and raster display.
                                        High-level customizable interactivity.
                                        Automatic viewer scaling in the web browser.
                                        Complete control over interface customization.
                                        Animation - positional, shape and display property
                                            transformations.
                                        Tight integration with off-the-shelf web development
                                            tools.
                                        Retrieval and display of HTML, XML, images, movies and
                                            other map files.
                                        Standards based scripting language. (ECMA-Script,
                                            JavaScript)
                                        Encapsulation - separation of data from display.
                                        Data driven from local or remote files or any ODBC
                                            database.
                                        Deliverable to a broad range of devices and media,
                                            including removable media, web browsers and wireless
                                            devices.
                                    
                            
                            
                                Examples
                                The Valley of the Shadow Project: This initial effort shows the theater-level movements of
                                    American Civil War units from Augusta County, Virginia, and
                                    Franklin County, Pennsylvania. Each major battle they fought in
                                    is linked to a database fact sheet, which provides detailed
                                    information on that unit's experience. All urls are hand coded
                                    and all animation hand tweened.
                                Production details available here: This link includes information on projection correction of
                                    historic maps as well as detailed information about conversion
                                    from the Shape to .swf file format.
                                The Salem Witch Trials Project: This map shows the occurrence of witchcraft accusations in
                                    the Massachusetts Bay Province during 1692. Animation and object
                                    properties are driven by externally loaded XML data. This
                                    regional map also demonstrates pan and zoom, lat long tracking,
                                    external file loading, an advanced menu system and dynamically
                                    calculated date values.
                                The Salem Township Map is in early development, serving as a
                                    test-bed for arbitrary coordinate system re-mapping and point
                                    plotting accuracy.
                                The Boston Back Bay Fens Project: This case study of Boston's Back Bay Fens and its surrounding
                                    urban landscape demonstrates the extreme data density that Flash
                                    can manage, while maintaining small file sizes and a high level
                                    of interactivity. This map is also in a state of early
                                    development.
                                Page Viewer Project: This simple page viewer demonstrates the ease with which
                                    Flash tools can be generalized and reused. The pan and zoom
                                    navigation tool shown in the page viewer originated in the Salem
                                    Regional map. It was re-purposed into a page viewing utility in
                                    a matter of minutes.
                            
                            
                                Remaining Challenges
                                Flash's .swf file format is an open standard and available for
                                    developers to integrate into their products. Our technique for
                                    migrating Shape files into .swf format optimizes the data by
                                    converting simple segmented lines into bezier spline curves
                                    using the MaPublisher Plug-in running in Adobe Illustrator.
                                    However, This conversion and optimization process is labor
                                    intensive. An automated conversion from standard GIS file
                                    formats into .swf format is needed for Flash to work well in a
                                    larger production pipeline. Ideally, ESRI would adopt the Flash
                                    format as a direct output option.
                                Software vendors and users have a great opportunity to deliver
                                    better products and projects based on Flash's strengths. For
                                    example, Flash uses a technology termed SmartClips, which allows
                                    a user to create a Flash interface that assists users in
                                    repetitive authoring tasks. A single high-level user can empower
                                    any number of lesser skilled users with advanced functionality
                                    using SmartClips. Another Macromedia product, Director, has
                                    recently added 3d capabilities with Shockwave 3-d. This promises
                                    rich and highly customizable 3d elements and environments that
                                    integrate cleanly with Flash.
                                Despite Flash's roots as an advertising and animation tool, the
                                    humanities GIS community should consider it as a display engine.
                                    Flash, more than other available technologies, can offer the
                                    extensibility and functionality required to display these
                                    complex geographic relationships.
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Relational Ontologies and the New Historicism
                        Stephen Ramsay
                        
                            Modern historiography, in whatever discipline it might occur, is
                                primarily an attempt at multi-leveled contextualization--a weaving
                                together of anecdotal evidence and "micro-narrative" with broader,
                                and perhaps more data-centric quantitative evidence. The modern
                                historian, in other words, cares as much about letters, photographs,
                                and snippets of conversation as about census data, geographical
                                information, and tax records. The former has traditionally resided
                                in digital archives; the latter, in relational databases and GIS
                                systems. Effecting the union of the various technical approaches is
                                not by itself a difficult matter. RDBMS, GIS, and digital
                                collections all participate in a similar quest for order and
                                organization. But with the rise of humanities computing has come
                                opportunities for thinking about how technology can be brought to
                                bear on the two-pronged historicism now current. How can the
                                traditional forms of computer-assisted data representation be used
                                to draw forth unforeseen connections, micro-narratives, and
                                anecdotal anomalies in the large and diverse datasets available to
                                the modern historian?
                            The Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities confronted
                                this problem recently with two historiographic projects: "The Salem
                                Witchcraft Papers" and "Evolutionary Infrastructures: Boston's Back
                                Bay Fens." Both of the scholars initiating the projects wanted to
                                capture large datasets concerning events in a sizeable geographic
                                area over a long period of time. They both envisioned databases that
                                would contain the usual large-dataset materials, like GIS data,
                                building records, and population census materials. In both cases,
                                however, the usefulness of the historical record was thought to
                                depend equally upon individual images, biographical information, and
                                individual documents.
                            The database schema we designed (discussed in a previous paper by D.
                                Pitti) organizes the data into a deliberately heterogeneous
                                ontology: people, places, significant events, objects, corporate
                                bodies, and bibliographical records. The data in each of these major
                                tables is organized according to its own internal logic, but these
                                five tables are related in an overall schema that in both systems
                                reaches to almost a hundred separate relational junctions and
                                subtables. The schema, therefore, consists mainly of many-to-many
                                relationships of the form "person/corporate_body.owner(),"
                                "object/event.role()," "bibliographical_record/person.about()," and
                                so forth. The data entry mechanisms for the projects involve a
                                combination of both large-scale import, as well as more finely
                                grained data entry. The former method is employed for entering the
                                main records themselves, but the relationships are hand-drawn and
                                classified by members of each respective team.
                            The knowledge possessed by any particular team member is necessarily
                                partial and imperfect. A scholar might have evidence of a connection
                                between the builder of the Boston Conservatory and the building
                                itself, but not about the relationship between that builder and
                                other buildings, or about the relationship between that building and
                                what stood before it. However, the database is all the time watching
                                and recording these connections. We developed a generic Java class
                                library (called the Sibelius libraries) that can search through the
                                junction tables for any particular record looking for these
                                relationships. Whenever the user arrives at a particular record, all
                                of the relationships with other tables are then aggregated and
                                presented to the user.
                            We believe this function is significant for two reasons. On the one
                                hand, it creates synergies out of the partial ontologies possessed
                                by the individual team members; what was partial before may now
                                reveal itself in full. More significant, however, is the fact that
                                these "unwound" connections often have the character of
                                micro-narratives. A typical search result for buildings in the Muddy
                                River Watershed in Boston, for example, might yield information
                                about the New England Conservatory. The linking mechanism will in
                                turn yield further connections to various architects, places,
                                buildings, and events, each of which will yield further connections.
                                One is therefore able to create statements like, "The New England
                                Conservatory, which was once the Harvard Medical Library, was built
                                by Henry Hunnewell, who also built the student house at 96 Fenway,
                                which was once owned by T. Frothingham . . ." At no point was this
                                narrative explicitly entered into the database in this form, and yet
                                the system can use the local connections to build the larger
                                narrative.
                            This paper will discuss our method from both a philosophical and
                                technical standpoint, and will go on to suggest some directions for
                                how research might proceed on the visualization of these "unwound"
                                narratives. We have been experimenting, in particular, with graph
                                visualization software, which we hope eventually to apply to the
                                ontological submaps created by the Sibelius engine.
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
