


    
        
            
                Organizing Multimedia Inter-textual Knowledge: New
                    Tasks, Challenges and Technologies
                
                    
                        Ziva
                        Ben-Porat
                        
                            Tel Aviv University
                            zivabp@post.tau.ac.il
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Siegfried
                        Reich
                        
                            Salzburg Research
                            siegfried.reich@salzburgresearch.at
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Wernher
                        Behrendt
                        
                            Salzburg Research
                            wernher.behrendt@salzburgresearch.at
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Experts in Arts and Humanities form a community with specialist knowledge,
                        but are at a disadvantage compared with "hard science" because the Arts and
                        Humanities community often lacks the technological background as well as the
                        software tools required to reach their potential audiences with today's
                        communication infrastructure. The CULTOS project addresses this need by
                        focusing on the development of multimedia authoring tools for the
                        construction of knowledge enhanced multimedia objects. The project is unique
                        in its balanced collaboration between culture ─ mainly literature and art -
                        researchers and technologies. This collaboration provides ample opportunity
                        to study ─ and hopefully resolve - the problematics of "translating" complex
                        content dependent phenomena into the language of computation, as well as the
                        problematics of training humanistic scholars in the use of software tools
                        and of providing them with easy to use tools and attractive interfaces. The
                        need for such authoring tools arose when a group of literary scholars came
                        up with the idea of constructing a digital multimedia intertextual library.
                        The first part of the paper will accordingly deal with the vision underlying
                        the proposed library and the second part will deal with the tools needed to
                        support such kind of library.
                
                
                    INTRODUCTION
                    The idea of a digital multimedia intertextual library is situated within the
                        theoretical position that there is a need to reconstruct ─ or, at least, to
                        re-present and make newly accessible - the European literary and artistic
                        canons. The canons are obviously treated not as the obsolete monuments of
                        particular cultural politics, but as one of several tools developed by
                        Western Culture (presumably other cultures as well) in order to
                        counterbalance the inevitability of the constant flattening of the semantic
                        content of semiotic systems. For example, many "native speakers" of western
                        culture can use the phrase "Achilles'heel" properly without remembering
                        (i.e. cognitively activating) the relevant myth. Culture has kept the myth
                        alive in two major ways: by compressing it into a linguistic unit, and by
                        making it part of its artistic canons, producing a large number of visual
                        representations, teaching it in schools, or, by bestowing prestige on those
                        who know it. Most of these tools no longer exist. But, it will be argued,
                        open hypermedia [6] and Semantic Web technology [2] provides us with new
                        means of keeping semantic depth alive in the present and for the future.
                    More specifically, the library aims at explicating intertextual relationships
                        [1]. Major cultural past artefacts still function in contemporary culture,
                        be it "high" or "low", popular or mass-media, verbal or non-verbal in the
                        form of inter-textual triggers. Explicitly defined inter-textual relations
                        (such as parody, quotation, amplification, opposition, etc.), traced back
                        from contemporary culture, allow us to go beyond a conventional study of
                        topoi and show the relations obtaining between texts that express different
                        themes in different media of different cultural status at any given
                        time.
                    For the users (both literature experts and everyday users), a navigable
                        thread constructed on the basis of such relations, linking the most
                        memorable ─ hence active - textual segments, presents the complex historical
                        relations in a manner that is easily accessible. It may have the "text"
                        appeal that long realistic novels, classical tragedies, and long venerated
                        museum pieces have lost. Furthermore, the backward movement from present
                        texts in all media to past canonic milestones and the collaborative dynamic
                        reconstruction of the European canon will embody the complex structure of
                        European cultural identity (common core and independent national features)
                        and will provide an important database for literary and cultural studies.
                    Such an ambitious plan requires careful planning and must begin in small
                        steps. In particular, over the next couple of years we plan to develop and
                        evaluate the tools for literature experts to allow them to
                        (semi-)automatically express interextual relationships. Based on these
                        tools, in a further step a libraries' infrastructure will be built so that
                        finally a digital representation of the canon can be established.
                    The remainder of this paper specifies the requirements for the tools to be
                        developed within its framework. We finish with a description of the current
                        status and ongoing work.
                
                
                    PREREQUISITES FOR KNOWLEDGE AWARE MULTIMEDIA AUTHORING TOOLS
                    
                        Digital Content
                        For intertextual threads to be created (automatically or manually), we
                            need digital access to those works which will be interlinked. More
                            specifically, we need at least a digital reference (such as a
                            description about an artefact). The library of explicated intertextual
                            threads must either keep these contents in some central repository, or
                            be able to take part in a federation of interconnected repositories that
                            are able to interoperate with each other using standards. Reliability
                            (in terms of accessibility of resources) and therefore naming of
                            artefacts will be of particular importance [9].
                    
                    
                        Analysis and Search
                        For the large scale creation of intertextual threads, experts require
                            sophisticated tools that automate ─ at least in part ─ the analysis of
                            texts for intertextual markers. This is comparable to the task that was
                            faced by the Human Genome Project [10]. The deciphering of the genome
                            would have taken hundreds or thousands of years if researchers had
                            carried on using the manual methods of genome analysis. The task was
                            finished within one generation because the methodology became
                            standardised, so that machines were able to do millions of analyses
                            automatically. In order to find intertextual relationships, similar
                            machines (software) will have to be developed in order to augment:
                                lexical search ─ it must be possible to find texts through
                                    lexical dependencies, tools must support word-stem analysis,
                                    understanding of composite terms (fish and chips), etc.
                                grammatical search ─ we may wish to find certain grammatical
                                    constructs (nested clauses, conditionals, etc)
                                semantic search ─ we need to be able to analyse various media
                                    with respect to prima facie cognitive patterns or markers
                                pragmatic search ─ we need to be able to interpret cognitive
                                    patterns in their respective contextual settings in order to
                                    infer valid intertextual relationships
                            
                        
                            Figure 1: Research Focus on Authoring
                        
                        It is obvious that the development of analysis tools for all four levels
                            amounts to the task of natural language understanding and even,
                            understanding of every-day life situations (common-sense reasoning).
                            This is why the research agenda for the project is as exciting as it is
                            open-ended. The focus of the current project is not on "deep reasoning",
                            but on developing the initial authoring tools that will enhance
                            productivity of humans undertaking these analysis tasks. We are only
                            including the first level of automatic analysis, that is, lexical
                            search.
                    
                    
                        Knowledge Structures, Topologies and Metaphors
                        Experts in Arts and Humanities have accumulated not only vast knowledge
                            about the works of art they study, but have also methods and "tools"
                            (albeit in their heads) to analyse the works, and to identify a fairly
                            large number of specific relationships that may occur between texts. At
                            the technical level, we are using an object-oriented, graph-based
                            knowledge representation language to specify a "knowledge model"
                            (ontology) of intertextuality (such as conceptual graphs [7]). Experts
                            use these very detailed knowledge structures in their everyday work, but
                            they also use metaphoric language for organising larger chunks of
                            knowledge.
                        We have, so far, identified four "topologies" in which intertextual
                            studies can be organised: Spider (one central text with all its
                            relations), Millipede (one central theme [text, topos, etc.] over time,
                            languages, media, etc.), Associative Map (free navigation from one text
                            to another), Mistletoe (two texts one of which depends on the other for
                            major components)
                        
                            Figure 2: High-Level Design Topologies for Intertextual
                                Studies
                        
                        The authoring tools are intended to support such high-level design
                            structures that will assist experts in organising their knowledge
                            appropriately, for today's IT-based audiences.
                    
                    
                        Collaborative Authoring
                        It is very likely that experts for different genres and different
                            cultural spheres will have to work together to establish interesting
                            links between works of art. This imposes that threads can be manipulated
                            by multiple participants in parallel as well as sequentially. Hence, the
                            authoring environment needs to be capable of supporting versioning
                            mechanisms and merging mechanisms for handling change clashes during
                            authoring [11].
                    
                    
                        Rights Management
                        Changes need to be traceable to a particular knowledge worker to be able
                            to protect the Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) of the worker.
                            Equally, the works that are referred to by an intertextual analysis may
                            also be subject to copyrights etc. As rights management is not the core
                            of our research, we aim at integrating existing solutions in the field
                            of IPR management. However, the threads produced need to carry enough
                            information to be able to track copyright relevant changes on threads or
                            related data, i.e. texts.
                    
                    
                        Presentation Component
                        In order to allow for presentation of threads and the different modes of
                            interaction (such as navigation, spatial representation, etc.) we aim at
                            developing specific presentation modules. Adaptation to different user
                            groups (i.e., students, scholars, "ordinary" end users) and modes of
                            interaction (i.e., editing, browsing, etc.) are important. For the
                            presentation components, the SMIL Standard (Synchronised Multimedia
                            Integration Language) and extensions to it, will be further explored
                            [12].
                    
                    
                    
                        Enhanced Multimedia Meta Objects (EMMOs)
                        In order to address the key requirements as briefly outlined in the
                            previous section we have developed the concept of capturing threads in
                            so-called EMMOs, i.e, autonomous knowledge objects [8][5]. These
                            Enhanced Multimedia Meta Objects aggregate the information needed to
                            represent all aspects of a thread. The following Figure describes the
                            logical views dealt with.
                        
                            Figure 3: EMMO with its Interfaces.
                        
                        The interfaces illustrated above are outlined below (for further details
                            see [5]). The interfaces are defined using widely adopted standards
                            wherever possible.
                                The Links Repository manages "standard", i.e., untyped
                                    associative links.
                                The Contents Repository interface defines the information
                                    necessary to store and retrieve contents and related meta-data.
                                    The actual implementation will rely on existing meta-data
                                    standards such as MPEG-7.
                                The Transformation Interface allows to import / export
                                    information stored in the EMMO. In a first step this will
                                    primarily be used for providing data for publishing (see
                                    presentation component above).
                                The Knowledge Interface refers to the knowledge model an EMMO
                                    is built upon. It is via this interface that an EMMO can
                                    exchange knowledge structures.
                                The Trading Interface holds the IPR information necessary to
                                    market the knowledge within an EMMO. This is of particular
                                    importance for trading the intertextual relationships, just like
                                    multimedia artefacts in general.
                                The Trails Repository: trails allow users to navigate based
                                    on other people's paths [3] thereby mainly assisting navigation
                                    in vast hypermedia networks.
                             
                
                
                    Summary And Ongoing Work
                    n this paper we have outlined the idea of an intertextual library. We have
                        argued that tools for (semi-)automatically creating these relationships
                        amongst multimedia artefacts is key to building the library and that we are
                        therefore developing the authoring tools in a first step.
                    The development of these tools is organised within a European project funded
                        by the IST-Programme (CULTOS, IST-2000-28134) which has started in September
                        2001. In a first requirements capture phase the literature experts have
                        demonstrated the methodologies used in their work and expressed their needs.
                        This has led to the specification of an EMMO as outlined above. In a next
                        step we will now define standard types of intertextual relationships (such
                        as parody, etc.) and adopt existing tools in order to allow the literature
                        experts to define intertextual cultural threads.
                
                
                    Acknowledgements
                    We would like to acknowledge the support by the European Union
                        (IST-2000-28134). Also, we would like to thank our colleagues in the
                        consortium.
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ziva
                                    Ben-Porat
                                
                            
                            The poetics of literary allusion
                        
                        
                            Poetics and Theory of Literature (PTL). Journal for the
                                Descriptive Poetics and Theory of Literature
                            
                                1
                                
                                
                                1976
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Tim
                                    Berners-Lee
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    James
                                    Hendler
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Ora
                                    Lassila
                                
                            
                            The semantic web
                        
                        
                            Scientific American
                            
                                124
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                        Available as 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Vannevar
                                    Bush
                                
                            
                            As we may think
                        
                        
                            The Atlantic Monthly
                            
                                176
                                1
                                101-108
                                1945
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Theodor
                                    Holm
                                    Nelson
                                
                            
                            Literary Machines
                            87.1 edition
                            
                                
                                Published by the author. Mindful Press
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Siegfried
                                    Reich
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Wernher
                                    Behrendt
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Christian
                                    Eichinger
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Martin
                                    Schaller
                                
                            
                            Document models for navigating digital
                                libraries
                        
                        
                            2000 Kyoto International Conference on Digital
                                Libraries: Research and Practice. November 13 - 16, Kyoto,
                                Japan
                            
                                
                                277-284
                                November 2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Siegfried
                                    Reich
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Uffe
                                    K.
                                    Wiil
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Peter
                                    J.
                                    Nürnberg
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Hugh
                                    C.
                                    Davis
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Kaj
                                    Grønbæk
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Kenneth
                                    M.
                                    Anderson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    E.
                                    Millard
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jörg
                                    M.
                                    KHaake
                                
                            
                            Addressing interoperability in open hypermedia: The
                                design of the open hypermedia protocol
                        
                        
                            New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia
                            
                                5
                                
                                207-248
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    John
                                    F.
                                    Sowa
                                
                            
                            Knowledge Representation: Logical, Philosophical, and
                                Computational Foundations
                            
                                Pacific Grove, CA
                                Brooks Cole Publishing Co.
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Dionysios
                                    C.
                                    Tsichritzis
                                
                            
                            Objectworld
                        
                        
                            Office Automation, Concepts and Tools
                            
                                
                                Springer
                                1985
                                379-398
                            
                        
                        Chapter 15
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Manolis
                                    Tzagarakis
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Siegfried
                                    Reich
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Nikos
                                    Karousos
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Dimitris
                                    Christodoulakis
                                
                            
                            Naming as a fundamental concept of open hypermedia
                                systems
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the '00 ACM Conference on Hypertext, May
                                30 - June 3, San Antonio, TX
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                                103-112
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)
                            
                            Genomics and Its Impact on Medicine and Society: A 2001
                                Primer
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Weigang
                                    Wang
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jörg
                                    M.
                                    Haake
                                
                            
                            Flexible coordination with cooperative
                                hypermedia
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the '98 ACM Conference on Hypertext,
                                June 20-24, 1998, Pittsburgh, PA
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                                245-255
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Phillipp
                                    Hoschka
                                
                            
                            Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language
                                SMIL
                            1.0 Specification,Recommendation 15 June 1998,
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        Available as: 
                    
                
            
        
    
