


    
        
            
                Skeletons in the closet: Saying what markup means
                
                    
                        Michael
                        Sperberg-McQueen
                        
                            World Wide Web Consortium
                            cmsmcq@acm.org
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Allen
                        Renear
                        
                            University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana
                            renear@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Claus
                        Huitfeldt
                        
                            University of Bergen
                            Claus.Huitfeldt@hit.uib.no
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        David
                        Dubin
                        
                            University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Our immediate area of concern is the problem of providing a clear, explicit
                    account of the meaning and interpretation of markup.
                Scores of projects in humanities computing and elsewhere assume implicitly that
                    markup is meaningful, and use its meaning to govern the processing of the data.
                    A number of authors have described systems for exploiting information about the
                    meaning or interpretation of markup; among those most relevant to the work
                    described here are Simons (1997 and 1999), Welty and Ide (1999), Ramalho et al.
                    (1999), and Sperberg-McQueen et al. (2000 and 2001).
                While a complete account of the "meaning of markup" may seem daunting, at least
                    part of this project appears manageable: explaining how to determine the set of
                    inferences about a document which are "licensed", implicitly or explicitly, by
                    its markup. This may or may not be all there is to an account of the meaning of
                    markup, but it is certainly a significant part of any account -- and doesn't
                    seem, on its face at least, to be particularly difficult to provide.
                However, it proves remarkably difficult to find, in the literature, any
                    straightforward account of how one can go about interpreting markup in such a
                    way as to draw all and only the correct inferences from it. For the most part,
                    the papers cited have limited themselves to describing how such a system would
                    work in theory, rather than describing a practical instantiation of the idea.
                    Designers and users of markup systems, meanwhile, have relied on human
                    understanding rather than on automated systems to interpret the markup in
                    documents.
                Sperberg-McQueen et al. (2000) describe at some length a 'straw man' proposal for
                    defining the proper interpretation of markup in a given markup language. In
                    particular, they identify the meaning of markup in a document as the set of
                    inferences authorized by it, and propose that it ought to be possible to
                    generate those inferences from the document mechanically, following certain
                    simple rules. Having set the strawman up, they then proceed to dismantle it,
                    noting a number of problems in the rules they have proposed for generating the
                    inferences. They sketch in general terms how a better account of meaning and
                    interpretation in markup could be constructed, but leave the actual construction
                    as an exercise for the reader.
                This paper describes a concrete realization of one part of the 'framework' model
                    proposed in Sperberg-McQueen et al. (2000), and outlines some of the problems
                    encountered in specifying the inferences licensed by commonly used DTDs. (Other
                    parts of the framework model are also being worked on, but the description of
                    that work is out of scope for this paper.)
                We focus here on the development of a notation (specifically, an SGML/XML DTD)
                    for expressing what Sperberg-McQueen et al. (2000 and 2001) call "sentence
                    skeletons", or "skeleton sentences". These are sentences, either in English or
                    some other natural language or in some formal notation, for expressing the
                    meaning of constructs in a markup language. They are called sentence skeletons,
                    rather than full sentences, because they have blanks at various key locations; a
                    system for automatic interpretation of marked up documents will generate actual
                    sentences by filling in the blanks in the sentence skeletons with appropriate
                    values from the documents themselves.
                In existing markup systems, the appropriate values are often to be taken from
                    whatever occurs in the document at a specific location. In the TEI DTD, for
                    example, the current page number for the default pagination is given by the
                    value of the 'n' attribute on the most recent 'pb' element, while the identifier
                    for the language of the text is given by the value of the 'lang' attribute on
                    the smallest enclosing element which actually has a value for the 'lang'
                    attribute; the language itself is described by whatever 'language' element in
                    the TEI header has that identifier as the value of its 'id' attribute.
                In the sentence skeleton, therefore, we need to label each blank with some
                    expression which describes how to derive the appropriate value to be used in the
                    sentences constructed from this skeleton. Since these expressions typically
                    "point" to other nearby markup structures, Sperberg-McQueen et al. refer to them
                    as "deictic expressions"; they express notions like "the contents of this
                    element" or "the value of the 'lang' attribute on the nearest ancestor which has
                    such a value" or "the value of the 'type' attribute on the nearest ancestor of
                    type 'div'".
                We will describe theoretical and practical problems arising in using sentence
                    skeletons to say what the markup in some commonly used DTDs actually means, in a
                    way that allows software to generate the correct inferences from the markup and
                    to exploit the information. These include the following questions among
                    others.
                What formalism should be used to write the sentence skeletons? We can easily
                    adopt some existing formalism, e.g. that of Prolog or whatever inference engine
                    we choose to use; can we devise a formalism that will not commit us to a
                    particular inference engine?
                There appears to be a significant difference among (a) sentence skeletons which
                    serve to formulate in some formal notation the specific facts expressed by the
                    markup in the document, (b) sentences or sentence skeletons which express
                    invariant rules about specific properties captured by the markup (e.g. "The
                    value of the 'lang' attribute is inherited; the value of the 'n' attribute is
                    not inherited") and (c) sentences or sentence skeletons which express invariant
                    rules about textual and other constructs (e.g. "The author of a letter is
                    physically located at the place given in the place-date line, on the date given
                    in the place-date line, unless the letter is falsified or forged in some way").
                    Sentences in group (b) serve to capture useful generalizations about the way
                    markup constructs in a given DTD behave; sentences in group (c) are important
                    for certain kinds of inferences, but appear to have relatively little to do with
                    the markup itself. What is the best way to reflect these differences in function
                    among the sentences and sentence skeletons of a markup system?
                What is the most convenient way to generate the inferencs licensed by markup?
                    Possibilities include ad hoc software, XSLT transformation sheets, and Prolog or
                    other inference tools. Our experience suggests that it may be worthwhile to
                    distinguish different classes of inferences, and to use different software to
                    derive the different classes.
                In sentence skeletons like "[this element] is in English", what do the deictic
                    expressions like "this element" actually refer to? In some cases the inferences
                    appear to relate to the linguistic components of the text itself ("This document
                    is written in English"), and in some cases to the text's formal properties
                    ("Augustine's Confessions is divided into 13 books"). In some cases, the markup
                    appears to license inferences about some object or entity in the real world
                    ("Henry Laurens was in Charleston on 18 August 1775"), but sometimes the
                    entities referred to are not at all in the real world ("Harry Potter missed the
                    Hogwarts Express on 1 September"). In still other cases, the inferences appear
                    to apply to the electronic encoding of the text itself ("This metadata was last
                    revised on 20 July 1998") or to some other witness to the same text ("The
                    recipient's copy of this letter is preserved in [some particular archival
                    collection, with some particular call number]"). Attempting to disentangle these
                    lands the would-be formulator of sentence skeletons promptly in a thicket of
                    ontological questions which have not yet received adequate attention.
                The ontological questions become even more thorny in connection with markup
                    systems like that of the Text Encoding Initiative, which are intended for use by
                    a wide variety of projects which are expected to have widely different views
                    about the ontological commitments to be associated with the TEI markup. Do
                    statements about Augustine's Confessions, for example, relate to some abstract
                    text distinct from each physical copy of the text, or is the phrase "Augustine's
                    Confessions" merely a convenient shorthand for "all the physical documents which
                    witness Augustine's Confessions"? It would appear essential to decide this
                    question in order to formulate sentence skeletons for markup languages like the
                    TEI, but the TEI itself is intentionally coy about the issue, in order to ensure
                    that textual Platonists and textual constructivists can both use TEI markup. It
                    is a challenge to build a similar ambiguity or vagueness into the set of
                    sentence skeletons which document the prescribed interpretation of TEI
                    markup.
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    José
                                    Carlos
                                    Ramalho
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jorge
                                    Gustavo
                                    Rocha
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    José 
                                    João
                                    Almeida
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Pedro
                                    Henriques
                                
                            
                            SGML documents: Where does quality go?
                        
                        
                            Markup Languages: Theory &amp; Practice
                            
                                1
                                1
                                75-90
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Gary
                                    F.
                                    Simons
                                
                            
                            Conceptual Modeling versus Visual Modeling: A
                                Technological Key to Building Consensus
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                30
                                4
                                303-319
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Gary
                                    F.
                                    Simons
                                
                            
                            Using Architectural Forms to Map TEI Data into an
                                Object-Oriented Database
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                33
                                1-2
                                85-101
                                1999
                            
                        
                        Originally delivered in 1997 at the TEI 10 conference in Providence,
                            R.I.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Claus
                                    Huitfeldt
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            Meaning and Interpretation of Markup
                        
                        
                            Paper delivered at ALLC/ACH 2000, Glasgow
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Claus
                                    Huitfeldt
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            Practical Extraction of Meaning from Markup
                        
                        
                            Paper delivered at ACH/ALLC 2001, New York
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christopher
                                    Welty
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Nancy
                                    Ide
                                
                            
                            Using the Right Tools: Enhancing Retrieval from
                                Marked-up Documents
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                33
                                
                                59-84
                                1999
                            
                        
                        Originally delivered in 1997 at the TEI 10 conference in Providence,
                            R.I.
                    
                
            
        
    
