


    
        
            
                New Philology and New Phylogeny. Aspects of a critical
                    electronic edition of Wolfram's 'Parzival'
                
                    
                        Michael
                        Stolz
                        
                            University of Basle
                            M.Stolz-Hladky@unibas.ch
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Wolfram von Eschenbach's Parzival ranks as one of the
                    most significant narrative works to emerge from medieval Europe. Composed
                    between 1200 and 1210, it combines the Arthurian material of Celtic origin with
                    the religious subject- matter of the Holy Grail. The central question that
                    hereby emerges is how a world torn apart by contradictions and conflicts can
                    again be rendered whole. Within the fictitious garb of the Parzival-romance
                    Wolfram confers upon this question a shape that transcends time, which gave rise
                    to intense interest on the part of listeners and readers. The sheer number of
                    medieval manuscripts preserving Parzival today speaks
                    for itself (16 manuscripts that have preserved the entire text, 70 fragments,
                    and a print dating from 1477).
                Ever since the late eighteenth-century revival of interest in the vernacular
                    poetry of the Middle Ages, modern literary scholarship has concerned itself with
                    Wolfram's Grail romance. The interpretations that have been arrived at are as
                    varied as they are controversial. Exegesis has, however, been based upon an
                    edition which, although a masterpiece of its time, can no longer meet today's
                    expectations. Karl Lachmann's Parzival edition of 1833
                    formed the standard basis for interpretation for generations of Germanists, but
                    recent scholarship is agreed upon the necessity for a new edition, and has
                    become increasingly discontented with working with a text that is generally
                    acknowledged to be in need of revision.
                The challenge presented to the editor of Parzival also
                    affects central problems in the theory of medieval philology today. Worthy of
                    note in this context are phenomena such as the relationship between oral
                    performance and its literary codification, the ensuing variability of medieval
                    texts, as well as concepts of authorship and transmission, and their effects
                    upon the way in which a text is presented. To put it in its simplest terms,
                    scholarly debate hinges upon two pivotal positions, which may be denoted by the
                    keywords New Philology and New Phylogeny: New Philology emphasises the variety
                    in transmission and the ensuing instability of medieval texts. Its tendency is
                    to undermine the hierarchy of individual manuscript sources in the interest of
                    the fundamentally variable, unstable status of medieval manuscript culture. New
                    phylogeny, by contrast, clings to manuscript interrelations and groupings as the
                    basis for the critical determination of the text. The concept of "phylogeny",
                    which derives from evolutionary biology, denotes the race-history of breeds.
                    Recently it has been applied to questions of manuscript interrelations. Research
                    on Chaucer, for example, has attempted, in an article published in the magazine
                    'Nature' which attracted great attention, to establish the 'Phylogeny of the
                    CanterburyTales'.
                A new critical edition of Parzival will have to come to
                    terms with the abundance of variant readings and the not inconsiderable problems
                    of establishing a text against the methodological background of the polarity of
                    New Philology and New Phylogeny. A challenge voiced in the Parzival scholarship of the 1960s now seems more relevant than ever
                    before. It was then argued that it was necessary "to publish all the material
                    that was collected for critical assessment before the question of manuscript
                    interrelation could be clarified" (E. Nellmann). Perhaps the idea, when it was
                    voiced in 1968, had a Utopian ring. Today, however, it can be put into practice,
                    step by step, with the aid of computer technology, and at reasonable expense. A
                    critical electronic edition of the manuscript sources would constitute a
                    work-base that would be an indispensable prerequisite for any new edition of
                        Parzival.
                The possibilities offered by the synoptic representation of the manuscript
                    sources on screen can be illustrated by reference to a short extract from the
                        Parzival prologue (see illustration below). The
                    screen presentation created by an internet browser shows above, in the left
                    window, a normalised text, based on the main manuscript D. In the window on the
                    left below is the apparatus of variants relating to this text. The windows on
                    the right contain the transcriptions and facsimiles of the various manuscript
                    sources. All the windows are internetted by hypertext-links and permit users an
                    interactive interchange between base-text, apparatus of variants, transcriptions
                    and facsimiles.
                
                There is no doubt that, on the screen, the variability postulated by New
                    Philology can be presented in much more lucid, visual terms than in conventional
                    editions of texts. The critical apparata of the traditional kind generally only
                    present readings in punctual fashion, reproducing word-for-word variants. On the
                    screen, however, the variety of readings in the manuscripts, in context, can be
                    encompassed. The second important advantage of electronic display lies, however,
                    in the presentation of manuscript groupings advocated by New Phylogeny. In this
                    context, computer programmes open new fields of experiment and accelerate
                    analytical processes. They facilitate the flexible disposition of manuscript
                    groupings and enable the rapid revision of philological judgements concerning
                    base manuscripts and stemmatological interrelations.
            Thus electronic display enables a synthesis of philological positions, which at first
                sight appear contradictory. Such a synthesis offers a work-tool, and an
                indispensable prerequisite for any future critical edition of Parzival. At the same
                time, the electronic display amounts to a form of edition which has its own peculiar
                nature and justification. Its concept results from the discussion concerning New
                Philology in the last decade, and leads this discussion towards a pragmatic
                editorial solution. From this a new Parzival edition can emerge, which, up to a
                point, enables its users to participate in the editorial process, and leaves them
                the freedom to decide between different textual variants and the form in which they
                are transmitted in the manuscripts. The manuscript data produced by this process
                would be of interest to both literary and linguistic historians.
            In employing this electronic medium, users are embedded in a century-old process of
                transmission - from the post-Gutenberg era they go back to the age before Gutenberg.
                Here the cultural and scholarly relevance of electronic editions of medieval texts
                becomes evident: they merge with a development in historical scholarship which is
                increasingly concerned with the mediality of manuscript transmission, as well as
                with questions of discourse analysis and anthropology. Political historiography,
                concerned with the great events of history, and social history, defined in relation
                to human labour, has yielded place to aspects of mediation, transmission and the
                preservation of historical data. The 'homo laborans' thus yields his place to the
                'homo tradens' of historical anthropology. This new trend may in turn favour a
                culturally based 'rephilologisation' of linguistic and literary scholarship.
            
        
    
