


    
        
            
                The Open Language Archives Community: An Infrastructure
                    for Distributed Archiving of Language Resources
                
                    
                        Gary
                        Simons
                        
                            SIL International
                            gary_simons@sil.org
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Steven
                        Bird
                        
                            University of Pennsylvania
                            sb@ldc.upenn.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    1. Introduction
                    A current trend in humanities computing is the explosion of digital resources
                        and tools. It is clear that the new electronic media in conjunction with
                        distribution via the World-Wide Web offer a degree of access to resources
                        that is unparalleled in history. But there is a gap between what users want
                        and what they can achieve today. For instance, potential users cannot
                        necessarily find the material they are interested in, different data
                        providers use different formats and conventions, the average researcher has
                        no idea how to prepare materials for publication via this medium, to name
                        just a few of the problems.
                    A new direction for humanities computing would be for the community to
                        organize its efforts so as to bridge this gap. This paper describes what one
                        subcommunity, namely, those working with language-related resources, is
                        doing in pursuit of this goal. The Open Language Archives Community was
                        founded in December of 2000 with the following purpose statement:
                            OLAC, the Open Language Archives Community, is an international
                                partnership of institutions and individuals who are creating a
                                worldwide virtual library of language resources by: (1) developing
                                consensus on best current practice for the digital archiving of
                                language resources, and (2) developing a network of interoperating
                                repositories and services for housing and accessing such
                                resources.
                        
                    This community involves both people and machines in cooperation. This paper
                        describes the infrastructure that has been developed in order to support
                        this cooperation. There are three aspects of infrastructure which are
                        explained in the remaining sections:
                            a technical infrastructure that defines how participating machines
                                interact with other participating machines,
                            a governance infrastructure that defines how participating people
                                interact with other participating people, and
                            a usage infrastructure that defines how participating people
                                interact with participating machines.
                        
                
                
                    2. Technical infrastructure
                    The technical infrastructure for OLAC is built on an infrastructure developed
                        within the digital libraries community by the Open Archives Initiative
                        [OAI][2]. This infrastructure has two components: a metadata standard
                        [OAI-DC] [3]and a metadata harvesting protocol [OAI-MHP] [4]. The OLAC
                        versions of these are specializations that address the particular needs of
                        language archiving. The two components of technical infrastructure are:
                            The OLAC Metadata Set [ OLAC-MS] [6] defines the elements to be
                                used in metadata descriptions of archive holdings and how such
                                descriptions are to be represented in XML for publication to the
                                community. The OLAC metadata set contains the 15 elements of the
                                Dublin Core metadata set [DC-MS] [1], plus 8 refined elements that
                                capture information of special interest to the language resources
                                community. In order to improve recall and precision when searching
                                for resources, the standard also defines a number of controlled
                                vocabularies for descriptor terms. The most important of these is a
                                standard for identifying languages [ Simons, 2000] [8].
                            The OLAC Metadata Harvesting Protocol [ OLAC-MHP] [5] defines the
                                protocol by which machines that are "service providers" query the
                                machines that are "data providers" in order to harvest the metadata
                                records they publish. In this model, every participating archive is
                                a data provider. Any other site may use the protocol to collect
                                metadata records in order to provide a service, such as offering a
                                union catalog of all archives or a specialized search service
                                pertaining to a particular topic. The protocol is based on HTTP.
                                Requests to data providers are issued via URLs with parameters;
                                responses are returned as XML documents.
                        
                    
                
                
                    3. Governance infrastructure
                    The infrastructure that supports the interaction among the human participants
                        of the Open Language Archives Community is defined in the OLAC process
                        document [ OLAC-Process] [7]. It defines three things:
                            The governing ideas of OLAC. These are defined through a summary
                                statement of its purpose, vision, and core values.
                            The organization of OLAC. This is defined in terms of the groups
                                of participants that play key roles: advisory board, participating
                                archives and services, prospective participants, working groups,
                                participating individuals, and coordinators.
                            The operation of OLAC. It is through documents (such as standards
                                and best practice recommendations) that OLAC defines itself and the
                                practices that it promotes. The document process defines how
                                documents are generated and how they progress from one status to the
                                next along the five-phase life cycle of development, proposal,
                                testing, adoption, and retirement.
                        
                
                
                    4. Usage infrastructure
                    The infrastructure that has been built to allow the community of users
                        interested in language resources to interact with the machines that provide
                        services for this community has four major components:
                            A community gateway (hosted by the Linguistic Data Consortium at
                                    ) provides
                                access to all aspects of the community: news, documents, a directory
                                of participants, links to service providers, resources for
                                implementing data providers, and so on.
                            A union catalog (to be hosted by Linguist List at ) of all records harvested
                                from all OLAC data providers along with a full search engine.
                            A language identification server ( hosted by SIL International at
                                    ) that documents the
                                standard OLAC follows in identifying the 6,800+ living languages of
                                the world.
                            A proxied data provider (also hosted by the Linguistic Data
                                Consortium) that gives individual researchers and small institutions
                                that do not have the capacity to implement their own data provider
                                an alternative way to publish their data and metadata as an OLAC
                                archive.
                        
                
                
                    5. Conclusion
                    During its first year of operation, 2001, the basic infrastructure for OLAC
                        has been developed. By the end of that year, twelve institutions have become
                        full participants and implemented data providers that publish a total of
                        18,000 metadata records. During the second year, 2002, the focus will be on
                        enlarging the community of participating archives. The technical standards
                        will be frozen in candidate status during that year so that archives need
                        not worry about a moving target as they implement an OLAC data provider.
                        Based on the experiences of the archives that participate in the first two
                        years, the standards will be refined and formally adopted by the community
                        during the third year, 2003. All individuals and institutions who have
                        language-related resources to share are enthusiastically invited to take
                        part in this new direction for humanities computing to build a distributed
                        virtual library of digital resources for the documentation and study of
                        human languages.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        
                            Dublin Core Metadata Element Set
                            Version 1.1: Reference Description
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Open Archives Initiative
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Schema for OAI implementation of Dublin Core
                                metadata
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            The Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata
                                Harvesting
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            OLAC Metadata Harvesting Protocol
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        To appear at 
                    
                    
                        
                            OLAC Metadata Set
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                         See
                            also "The OLAC Metadata Set and Controlled Vocabularies," by Steven Bird
                            and Gary Simons. Proceedings of the ACL/EACL Workshop
                                on Sharing Tools and Resources for Research and Education, Toulouse,
                                July 2001, Association for Computational Linguistics. 
                    
                    
                        
                            OLAC Process
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Gary
                                    Simons
                                
                            
                            Language identification in metadata descriptions of
                                language archive holdings
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the Workshop on Web-Based Language
                                Documentation and Description 12-15 December 2000, Philadelphia,
                                USA
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
