


    
        
            
                The Web Cahier: A Tool For Implementing
                    Just-in-Time-Teaching In the Humanities
                
                    
                        Mark
                        Wolff
                        
                            Hartwick College
                            wolffmanO@hartwick.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Web Cahier is a web-based server application that allows instructors to
                    assess individual student performance and to prepare targeted lectures and
                    discussions according to the needs and interests of students. The pedagogy which
                    informs the design of the Web Cahier is Just-in-Time-Teaching, or JiTT, a
                    teaching strategy developed by Gregor M. Novak at Indiana University-Purdue
                    University Indianapolis and Evelyn T. Patterson at the United States Air Force
                    Academy for introductory physics classes (I will discuss the effectiveness of
                    this pedagogy in a separate paper). During this poster session I will explain
                    the design of the Web Cahier, sollicit comments and suggestions on ways to
                    improve it, and make the application available to other scholars as open source
                    software.
                The Web Cahier uses MySQL as its back-end database and PHP as its dynamic HTML
                    interface. I will demonstate the program on a computer running the Linux
                    operating system, but the Web Cahier can be implemented on multiple platforms.
                The Web Cahier has an instructor interface and a student interface. For a given
                    course the instructor creates cahiers, or sets of questions for assignments to
                    be completed before students come to class. A cahier consists of web objects,
                    such as text, images, short answer text fields, essay question text areas, and
                    multiple choice questions using radio buttons. The instructor can build cahiers
                    by creating and arranging web objects. No experience with HTML is required,
                    although the appearance of a cahier is improved with basic HTML for which brief
                    documentation is provided online. The instructor can determine how she wants to
                    respond to each answer a student gives in a cahier: a pulldown list of
                    predetermined values (excellent, good, adequate, poor, unacceptable, etc.),
                    short answer, or detailed comments. The instructor can set a deadline for when
                    students must complete a cahier. Once a deadline has passed, students will not
                    be able to modify their answers for the cahier. The instructor can evaluate
                    student work easily and assign grades that students can see when they return to
                    a cahier. The instructor can also manage course enrollment and easily add and
                    drop students.
                Students can access cahiers from any networked computer. They can work on an
                    assignment intermittently, saving their work and returning to it as often as
                    they like before the deadline. Once a deadline has passed they can return to a
                    cahier to review their work and to receive instructor comments, but they cannot
                    make any changes.
                The Web Cahier is available for peer evaluation at . The instructor user id is
                    "ALLC" and the password is "ACH". The student user id is "student" and the
                    password is "student". This demonstration is based on the Online History Lab
                    which was designed by the staff at Hartwick College's Stevens-German Library to
                    teach students basic skills in working with historical documents. Evaluators
                    should feel free to create their own courses and enroll the student "ALLC_ACH,
                    student" to test the software.
                I hope others will find the Web Cahier interesting and useful for their own
                    teaching, and I welcome requests to test the software at other institutions. I
                    would also welcome offers to help develop the Web Cahier which I make available
                    according to the GNU Public Licence.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Gregor
                                    M.
                                    Novak
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Evelyn
                                    T.
                                    Patterson
                                
                            
                            Just-in-Time-Teaching: Active Learner Pedagogy with
                            WWW
                        
                        
                            Paper presented at IASTED International Conference on
                                Computers and Advanced Technology in Education, May 27-30, 1998 in
                                Cancun, Mexico
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        Available online at .
                    
                
            
        
    
