


    
        
            
                 Towards declarative descriptions of transformations:
                    An approach based on topic maps
                
                    
                        Eva
                        Lenz
                        
                            University of Bielefeld
                            eva.lenz@uni-bielefeld.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Andreas
                        Witt
                        
                            University of Bielefeld
                            andreas.witt@uni-bielefeld.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Angelika
                        Storrer
                        
                            University of Dortmund
                            storrer@hytex.info
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    The topic map standard ISO 13250 (Pepper 1999) provides an innovative and
                        standardized way to express information about documents.. Although the
                        relevance of topic maps for the humanities has been recognized, only few
                        applications in this area have been developed up to now.
                    In the following we will explain an approach for transforming document
                        collections which uses a topic map to express meta information. We believe
                        that this approach can be applied to various areas in the humanities where
                        information about documents is important, and will present two research
                        areas where our model can be employed: adaptive
                            hypertext and relationships between document
                            grammars.
                    Brusilovsky (2001) reviews the field of adaptive hypermedia. Adaptive
                        hypermedia systems build a model of the goals, preferences and knowledge of
                        the individual user and use this model during user interaction in order to
                        adapt the hypertext to the user's needs. Important application areas are
                        adaptive educational hypermedia and systems for managing personalized views
                        in information spaces. In this paper, we outline how topic maps can be used
                        to support the development process and maintenance of adaptive
                        hypertexts.
                    Document grammars define the structure of XML or SGML annotations using a
                        schema language. They can be used to check the validity of a document. The
                        oldest schema language is used for expressing document type definitions
                        (DTDs). Recently, a number of new schema languages have evolved in this
                        field, most of which use an XML syntax (Cagle et al. 2001). It can be
                        beneficial to formally express the relationships between two or more
                        document grammars. In the case of DTDs, these relationships can be described
                        using XML or SGML architectures as defined in an annex of ISO 10744
                        (HyTime). We will show how topic maps can be used to model relationships
                        between different document grammars, abstracting from the schema language in
                        which they are expressed.
                
                
                    Description of the model
                    
                    Our model can be employed to describe and perform a transformation of a
                        collection of documents into a new one, taking into account a specific
                        context. In the following we speak of the initial
                            document collection (or the corpus)
                        and the generated document collection. The model
                        is based on a three-level information architecture (see figure), consisting
                        of 
                            1. the document level: a corpus of
                                annotated documents,
                            2. the conceptual level: a knowledge
                                net, modelling relationships between the documents (or parts of
                                annoted documents) in the form of a topic map, and
                            3. the application context level:
                                information about the context in which the transformation is to take
                                place. For example, in the case of adaptive hypertext, this level
                                contains the user model.
                        
                    A set of rules describes how the new document collection is to be generated
                        from the corpus, taking into account the state of the knowledge net and the
                        application context.
                    We use XML and related technologies for the implementation of this model.
                        This allows us to use and produce documents in the web context, and to apply
                        available tools (parsers, browsers, generators, validators). We assume that
                        all model components be expressed declaratively in an XML syntax: the
                        initial document collection, the topic map (Pepper &amp; Moore 2001),
                        the information about the application context, and the rule language.
                    By expressing the rules in a declarative language instead of hard-coding them
                        into a programming language a level of abstraction is introduced. Each rule
                        can be regarded as a mapping which takes a condition (on XML documents) as
                        its input and produces an action (XML fragment) as its output. The
                        expressions allowed in the rules, and thus the type of transformation the
                        system is able to perform, are clearly defined by a document grammar.
                    The generation of documents is realized in two steps, comparable to the
                        implementation of the Schematron schema language (cf. Cagle et al. 2001, cp.
                        14). Each step is performed by an XSLT stylesheet. XSLT is a functional
                        programming language optimized for parsing and generating XML documents. The
                        first stylesheet takes the rules as its input and translates them into a
                        second XSLT stylesheet, i.e. it translates the abstract descriptions of
                        conditions and actions into an executable form. This second stylesheet takes
                        the initial document collection, the topic map, and the application context
                        information and generates the new document collection. This approach makes
                        the rules more compact, easier to understand, and easier to maintain than
                        program code.
                
                
                    Application A: Adaptive hypertexts
                    In the case of adaptive hypertexts, a collection of documents is tailored to
                        suit the user by adapting the content and the linking structure. Brusilovsky
                        (2001) describes a detailed taxonomy of the possible forms of adaptation,
                        which he calls adaptation techniques. Typically, the collection is filtered
                        (e.g., an expert of the domain sees other hypertext nodes and links as a
                        novice). Other adaptation techniques comprise sorting, visual annotation, or
                        "dimming" of links, as well as "stretchtext".
                    When we apply our model to the field of adaptive hypertext, the initial
                        document collection (on the document level) comprises all documents for
                        every type of user, whereas the generated document collection is a hypertext
                        adapted to one user. The relevant characteristics of that user are described
                        in the user model (application content level). For example, we could model
                        that users from a neighboring discipline "know" only certain concepts and
                        technical terms of the domain in question.
                    In the context of a project called HyTex (hypertext conversion based on
                        textgrammatical annotation, cf. Lenz &amp; Storrer 2002) which is part
                        of a joint research group "Text-Technological Modelling of Information", we
                        model technical terms of a subject domain together with their relationships
                        in the form of a topic map (conceptual level). Different views on the
                        subject domain (on its concepts, technical terms, on their relations to
                        other terms and to documents) can be modelled using various topic map
                        constructions. These views correspond to characteristics of the user
                        model.
                    The rules describe how an adapted hypertext is to be created from the initial
                        document collection taking into account the user model and the topic map.
                        The code that has to be generated will always be very similar for the same
                        adaptation technique, e.g. for dimmed links. In this case, we would allow
                        "dimmed text" as a possible action in the rule language, and implement the
                        code once in the XSLT stylesheet.
                    We benefit from this approach in the HyTex project, as it allows us to test
                        different strategies for text-to-hypertext conversion, which can readily be
                        expressed in the form of declarative rules. The model can thus serve as a
                        tool in the area of hypertext research.
                
                
                    Application B: Expressing and processing relations between document
                        grammars
                    XML and SGML architectures (architectural forms definition requirements,
                        AFDR) allow one to express relations between two DTDs, a meta DTD and a
                        client DTD. They have been used in areas relevant to the humanities (Simons
                        1999). Software that can process architectures can automatically transform a
                        document annotated according to the client DTD into a document instance of
                        the meta DTD. This process is called derivation. Examples of use
                            include:
                            filtering document content,
                            filtering markup (e.g., transforming a richly annotated corpus
                                into a corpus with annotations specialized for a certain
                                purpose),
                            modifying markup (e.g., translating tag names from german to
                                english), and
                            changing attributes into elements and vice versa.
                        
                    On the poster, we will show how document grammars - not only DTDs - and their
                        relationships can be expressed using a topic map, and how to apply our model
                        to generate derivations.
                    In this application scenario for our model, the initial document collection
                        contains documents annotated according to the "client" document grammar. The
                        generated ("derived") document collection will be annotated according to the
                        "meta" document grammar. The following steps have to be performed:
                            Translating the document grammars into a topic map (conceptual
                                level). This can be done automatically, e.g. using XSLT, when the
                                document grammar has an XML syntax.
                            Modeling the relations between the document grammars in the topic
                                map (conceptual level).
                            Specifying which documents are to be derived according to which
                                document grammar (application context level).
                            Describing the translation process by means of the rule
                                language.
                        
                    Application B models the set of relations between document grammars as
                        defined in the AFDR, but our model allows for the extension of this limited
                        set.
                    This application of our model is used in the context of the project
                        "Secondary information structuring and comparative discourse analysis" (cf.
                        Sasaki et al. 2002). This project is also part of the joint research group
                        already mentioned.
                
                
                    Conclusion
                    We have described a model based on topic maps designed for a declarative
                        description of a document collection and transformations on that collection
                        in an application context. We have presented two important fields of
                        application for this model, but we assume that its application can be
                        extended to other areas relevant to the humanities.
                
            
        
        Bibliography
        
            
                
                    Peter
                        Brusilovsky
                    Adaptive hypermedia
                
                
                    User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction
                    
                        11
                        1/2
                        87-110
                        2001
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                        Kurt
                        Cagle
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jon
                        Duckett
                    
                
                
                    
                        Oliver
                        Griffin
                    
                
                
                    
                        Stephen
                        Mohr
                    
                
                 
                    
                        Francis
                        Norton
                    
                
                
                    
                        Nik
                        Ozu
                    
                
                
                    
                        Ian
                        Stokes-Rees
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jeni
                        Tennison
                    
                            
                
                    
                        Kevin
                        Williams
                    
                
                Professional XML Schemas
                
                    Birmingham
                    Wrox Press
                    2001
                
            
            
                
                    Eva
                        AnnaLenz
                    Angelika
                       Storrer
                    Converting a corpus into a hypertext: An approach using XML topic maps and XSLT
                
                
                    Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2002), Las Palmas
                    
                        
                        
                        2002
                    
                
            
                
                    Steve
                       Pepper
                    Navigating haystacks and discovering needles. Introducing the new topic map standard
                
                
                    Markup Languages: Theory &amp; Practice
                    
                        1
                        4
                        47-74
                        1999
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                        Steve
                        Pepper
                    
                
                
                    
                        Graham
                        Moore
                    
                
                XML Topic Maps (XTM) 1.0
                
                    
                    
                    2001
                
            TopicMaps.Org Specification. 
            
                
                    Felix
                       Sasaki
                    Claudia
                        Wegener
                    Andreas
                        Witt
                    Dieter
                        Metzing
                    Jens
                        Pönninghaus  
                    Co-reference annotation and resources: a multilingual corpus of typologically diverse languages
                
                
                    Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2002), Las Palmas
                    
                        
                        
                        2002
                    
                
            
                
                    Gary
                        Simons
                    Using Architectural Forms to Map TEI Data into an Object-Oriented Database
                
                
                    Computers and the Humanities
                    
                        33
                        1/2
                        85-101
                        1999
                    
                
            
        
    
