


    
        
            
                Into the Depths of Data. Methods of Subject Specific
                    Content Retrieval
                
                    
                        Kurt
                        Gärtner
                        
                            University of Trier
                            gaertnek@mailer.uni-marburg.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Gisela
                        Minn
                        
                            University of Trier
                            minn@uni-trier.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Andrea
                        Rapp
                        
                            University of Trier
                            rappand@uni-trier.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Martin
                        Raspe
                        
                            University of Trier
                            raspe@uni-trier.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Ruth
                        Christmann
                        
                            University of Trier
                            christma@uni-trier.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Thomas
                        Schares
                        
                            University of Trier
                            schares@uni-trier.de
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    In April 1998, the Competence Centre for Electronic
                            Retrieval and Publishing Techniques in the Humanities was founded
                        at the University of Trier. The use of international hard- and software
                        independent standards as SGML/XML is one of the main targets of the
                        Competence Centre in dealing with full-text digitization especially of
                        critical editions, dictionaries, and important reference works. Information
                        scientists and humanists from various disciplines are working closely
                        together in order to guarantee that the electronic resources developed at
                        the Centre meet with scientific requirements. Furthermore, the team aims at
                        complex and powerful retrieval mechanisms that can be handled easily by a
                        consistently user-oriented design of Graphical User Interfaces. An important
                        overall feature that has often been ignored by people working in the field
                        of digitization but is characteristic for the research done at the
                        Competence Centre is the close linking of software development to the
                        scholarly background of the material.
                    Examples for the development of user-oriented software in different projects
                        as well as for the embedding of the activities of the Competence Centre into
                        research done by universities and the German academies of sciences shall be
                        given in the following three papers on (A) the Rhine-Meuse Net, (B) the WIRE
                        project, and (C) the digitization of the Deutsche
                            Wörterbuch - a history, an art history, and a German language
                        and literature project.
                    (A) The conception of the so-called Rhine-Meuse Net originated from the
                        activities of a Collaborative Research Centre (= SFB 235) having examined
                        the history of a European core area from the Ancient World to the 19th
                        century. For more than 12 years, a large amount of valuable data has been
                        accumulated in multiple document types and formats. However, not all the
                        material was published, although, in many cases, even the unpublished
                        material is of high interest to researchers in and outside the context of
                        the SFB. Therefore, the existing data will now be encoded in order to ensure
                        its longevity and at the same time be entered into a database. Thus it will
                        be possible to use these data even though the funding of the SFB by the
                        Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (= DFG) is due to cease in 2002.
                    (B) In contrast to the Rhine-Meuse Net dealing with material already
                        existing, WIRE, the Word and Image Retrieval Environment, is primarily intended as a tool for
                        scholars that need some support in building new (digital) collections of
                        scientifically relevant texts and images. The internet-based system allows
                        for an integration of texts, structured data, images, and bibliographies
                        into a relational database. As WIRE can be configured according to specific
                        needs, it does not only support the use by individual scholars but is also
                        well apt at being used by teams of scholars working together on a particular
                        object of research. Since various retrieval functions are implemented, WIRE
                        is not only useful for scholars who build new collections but also for those
                        who only want to browse through collections built by their colleagues.
                    (C) The retrodigitization of the Deutsche Wörterbuch
                        by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm has to be seen in the broader context of
                        dictionary making at the University of Trier. When work on a new Middle High
                        German dictionary was started in 1994, lexicographers wished to have access
                        to as many electronic texts and dictionaries as possible. However, to fully
                        exploit the advantages of an electronic dictionary, one does not only need a
                        fairly thorough markup of the entries but also a highly comfortable way to
                        present the dictionary on screen and thus make it readable - just imagine
                        that several entries of the Deutsche Wörterbuch
                        cover more than 300 columns in print! The demonstration of the CD-ROM
                        prototype of the Deutsche Wörterbuch might serve as
                        a good example for how in-depth retrieval carried out thoroughly contributes
                        to the development of software that allows accessing the dictionary data in
                        new ways.
                    It will be very interesting to see how new possibilities to access data of
                        various provenance and of multiple kinds will lead to new questions, new
                        methods, and new insights into the digitally edited source material.
                
                
                    
                        Title A: The Information and Reference Network for the History of the
                            Rhine-Meuse Area. An Area-Oriented Subject Information System for the
                            Humanities
                        Dr. Gisela Minn
                        Dr. Andrea Rapp 
                        
                            
                                1. General and Institutional Preconditions
                                Apart from the parameter "time", the parameter "area" has in the
                                    past few years received increased attention as a fundamental
                                    category of human existence. Particularly regions as
                                    middle-sized units of area have established themselves in a
                                    multitude of disciplines as ideal units for investigation. In
                                    the Rhine-Meuse Net, the regional area is made use of as a
                                    central access and ordering category for the integration of
                                    research results that are far apart with regard to time and
                                    differ in document type, methods, and topic. The international
                                    research compound of the Collaborative Research Centre "Between
                                    the Meuse and the Rhine. Connections, Encounters, and Conflicts
                                    in a European Core Area from the Ancient World to the 19th
                                    Century" (SFB 235) has acquired a large amount of valuable and,
                                    with regard to document types, very heterogeneous data, that are
                                    not only concerned with a common area of investigation but are
                                    also closely connected with regard to content.
                                This complex amount of data forms the nucleus of a projected
                                    database serving as a reference system for European regional
                                    history. The project is being funded by the Deutsche
                                    Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) since 1st November 2001. Apart from
                                    the historical field with all its specialist research interests,
                                    there are involved related disciplines such as art history,
                                    archaeology, history of law, and history of German and Roman
                                    languages; they all partake in the research compound, as well as
                                    various national and international, university and
                                    non-university cooperation partners.
                                Therefore the project aims firstly to take into account the
                                    changed needs for information of a growing international
                                    research community and secondly to lay the grounds for European
                                    research in history beyond the borders of nation-states. For
                                    this the network is particularly apt, as it opens up a European
                                    core area at the intersection between Western and Middle Europe
                                    from ancient times up to the present, and it will present the
                                    results of international researchcollaboration. The long-term
                                    data-conservation and its platform-independent use is ensured by
                                    a consistent application of international standards on the basis
                                    of SGML/XML.
                            
                            
                                2. Content-Related Principles of the Network
                                The realization of the network starts at two core units: Firstly,
                                    the annotated bibliography of the whole publication output of
                                    the SFB (about 900 nos.) will be edited, including all the
                                    unpublished dissertations and theses which document the whole
                                    scope of research. Due to the area-oriented interest of the SFB,
                                    cartographical methods and techniques of representation belong
                                    to the most important research procedures. Thus secondly, an
                                    electronic archive of maps was built (of about 500 items) that
                                    will be linked to the bibliography.
                                By these two core units that are representative for the whole
                                    scope of the network, thesauri of places, persons, and subjects
                                    will be accumulated and structured hierarchically for an
                                    in-depth disclosure of the data. They form the basic framework
                                    for a further indexing of the data and will be extended to a
                                    dynamic research tool that will become more extensive and
                                    complex with the integration of each new reference unit. A
                                    sophisticated system of indexes and metadata will guarantee the
                                    linking of these units.
                            
                            
                                3. Variety of Document Types
                                The document types representing the cultural heritage as well as
                                    the results of scientific research in digital form are very
                                    heterogeneous: texts, maps, pictures, plans, images, tables,
                                    archival finding-aids and repository guides, indices,
                                    bibliographies etc. At the same time, these document types are
                                    very closely related as regards content in a very complex and
                                    multidirectional manner. In the Humanities especially,
                                    far-reaching methodical and content-related impulses are to be
                                    expected by an explicit representation of these relations.
                                Moreover, the general approach requires interdisciplinary and
                                    comparative studies, new access to digital resources, and the
                                    development of cartographic methods for analyzation and
                                    documentation. Therefore, we aim at a concatenation, retrieval
                                    and integration of these digital reference-units of different
                                    document types in a reference compound. The following document
                                    types form the database of the network and have to be opened up
                                    and interlinked:
                                        Units of information referring to area and region such
                                            as local registers and catalogues, complex place lexica,
                                            single maps and series of maps, annotated atlasses that
                                            combine maps, place catalogues, and commentaries.
                                        Units of information referring to persons and
                                            institutions such as registers and catalogues of
                                            persons, prosopographies and biograms of persons,
                                            catalogues, lexica, tables, and lists of institutions.
                                        Units of information that combine information on texts
                                            and pictures such as text or picture catalogues,
                                            visualizations, and reconstructions.
                                        Units of information that represent sources, archival
                                            finding-aids, and instruments for the documentation of
                                            research such as special bibliographies, region-related
                                            source editions of different genres, and repository
                                            guides, literature and review service, documentations of
                                            research.
                                    
                                Therefore we provided for the following ways of access by
                                    thesauri: access by place (in addition by visual representations
                                    such as two- or three-dimensional maps), access by time, access
                                    by person, access by topic, access by object via document types
                                    (e.g. only maps, only sources, etc.), access by funding
                                    organizations (respective research institution).
                            
                            
                                4. Methods, Technical Bases
                                Due to the complexity of the structures and the implicit
                                    relations characteristic for the Humanities, the construction of
                                    such networks cannot be carried out by automatic means only but
                                    has to be completed and supervised by human researchers.
                                    Therefore it is all the more important to develop mechanisms
                                    with the help of standards that support the construction of a
                                    complex structure and corresponding retrieval mechanisms
                                    effectively. Moreover, these mechanisms have to be well
                                    documented and safely stored for further research in times of
                                    rapid technical change. Variable, differentiated, and efficient
                                    strategies for searches and visualizations have to be created
                                    for convenient use.
                                Due to different structures of document types brought together in
                                    the network, existing DTD schemes have to be checked as to their
                                    usability, varied and expanded, and new DTD schemes have to be
                                    developed for document types not already on hand in an
                                    SGML-compliant format. These schemes have to be applicable to
                                    different research projects as well. The open conception of the
                                    network resulting from this is the precondition for a transfer
                                    of these structures and methods to other information and
                                    reference networks.
                            
                            
                                5. Comparisons and Prospects
                                The information and reference network is open to cooperation
                                    projects with university and non-university institutions
                                    offering further information that goes beyond the scope of
                                    research of the SFB. Special emphasis is laid on the integration
                                    of libraries and archives. For example, the SFB bibliography as
                                    core unit is linked to the OPAC of Trier University Library. The
                                    integration of archival finding-aids beginning with the
                                    finding-aids of the municipal archive Worms may serve as an
                                    example for cooperation with other archives. Furthermore,
                                    cooperations with scholars from neighbouring countries have been
                                    established which focus on common region-related aspects and
                                    methods respectively and, by common use of the information and
                                    reference network, should be long-lasting.
                                In some regards, the Rhine-Meuse Net was inspired by the project
                                    "The Valley of the Shadow. Two Communities in the American Civil
                                    War", that was carried out at the University of
                                    Virginia/Charlottesville ().
                                    Especially the regional aspect as well as the variety of
                                    document types offered are comparable to the content and
                                    structure of the Rhine-Meuse Net. However, a significant
                                    difference can be seen in the variety of topics of the documents
                                    worked on in the Rhine-Meuse Net and in the in-depth retrieval
                                    and thorough interlinking of these materials.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        6. Literature
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Franz
                                            Irsigler
                                        
                                    
                                    Raumkonzepte in der historischen
                                    Forschung
                                
                                
                                    Zwischen Gallia und Germania, Frankreich und
                                        Deutschland. Konstanz und Wandel raumbestimmender Kräfte 
                                    Trierer Historische Forschungen 
                                    
                                        Hrsg. von
                                        
                                            Alfred
                                            Heit
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        12
                                        
                                        
                                        1987
                                        11-27
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Andrea
                                            Rapp
                                        
                                    
                                    Die elektronische Publikation, Erschließung und
                                        Vernetzung des Trierer Korpus mittelfränkischer Urkunden des
                                        14. Jahrhunderts
                                
                                
                                    Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie
                                    
                                        Hrsg. von
                                        
                                            Georg
                                            Braungart
                                        
                                        
                                            Karl
                                            Eibl
                                        
                                        
                                            Fotis
                                            Jannidis
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        Paderborn
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        2000
                                        147-161
                                    
                                
                                online in: Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie
                                    
                            
                            
                                
                                    RMnet
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Title B: WIRE -- An Instrument for Collecting Visual and Textual Data
                        Martin Raspe
                        
                            
                                WIRE (“Word &amp; Image Retrieval
                                        Environment”) is an integrated environment for
                                    collecting scientific resources, particularly in the field of
                                    art history. It is being developed at Trier University and is
                                    specifically taylored to meet the methodologic needs of the
                                    discipline. Image data, bibliographic entries, source texts (and
                                    optionally other structured data) are stored in a single
                                    relational database, along with an unrestricted number of
                                    descriptive texts which may contain individual formatting. The
                                    whole material can be searched conventionally; in addition, the
                                    content is accessible through a flexible, hierarchically
                                    organized, multi-lingual keyword system. Data can be entered as
                                    well as queried via Internet from different places at a time.
                                    The program is based on widely-spread software components
                                    (Microsoft Word plus a web browser) and is easy to learn.
                            
                            
                                1. The Problem
                                Not many art historians use database systems in their research
                                    projects. This fact is partly explained by the general
                                    reluctance of traditional scholars towards new technologies; on
                                    the other hand, available database software doesn't lend itself
                                    easily to the specific tasks of this discipline. The sources
                                    consist of images and various types of historic texts which do
                                    not fit easily into predefined categories or structures;
                                    accordingly, the methodology of art history is mainly based on
                                    associative rather than standardized procedures.
                                Consequently, the incoming data either has to be trimmed down to
                                    fit in schematic entry forms, or the resulting overhead will
                                    grow so complex that the efforts to manage the database soon
                                    overshadow its practical use. Moreover, in the course of every
                                    research project questions tend to come up that have not been
                                    thought of when the database structure was first conceived.
                            
                            
                                2. The Idea
                                Thus the staff of the History of Art department at Trier
                                    University asked for a program that manages text along with
                                    images, is equally suited for the needs of teaching and
                                    research, supports team cooperation at different places and can
                                    be understood by scholars who have hardly any computing
                                    experience beyond word processing. Departing from this
                                    specification I started to look around for software, but it soon
                                    turned out that existing programs - most of them authoring
                                    systems - are much too complex and would strain the finances of
                                    a small department. This situation led to the idea of creating
                                    such a program myself. Since I am an art historian and have some
                                    experience in computer programming, the task seemed feasible; as
                                    an associated member of the "Competence Centre", I get all the
                                    practical support I need.
                            
                            
                                3. The Concept
                                My intention was to create a kind of working tool for art
                                    historians that supports the collecting of visual and textual
                                    data. It soon became clear that the program had to focus on
                                    three major types of material, i.e. images
                                        of works of art, original source
                                        texts and bibliographic
                                        references, all three of which should be accessed
                                    through textual descriptions. In addition it should be possible
                                    not only to collect the material,
                                    but also to arrange it, to comment on it and to add independent
                                    scientific texts without restrictions. On top of that, people at
                                    different places should be able to work simultaneously with the
                                    same database.
                                WIRE tries to meet these requirements in a simple and robust, but
                                    flexible way. It tries to combine two different types of data, a
                                        collection of unstructured scientific
                                        texts and a structured database
                                        system that can be queried with exact criteria. The
                                    texts that describe, summarize or comment the source material
                                    form the scientific backbone of the database. Links can be
                                    created from these texts to any of the source documents and
                                    between them, so that the user is guided from one document to
                                    other pertinent subjects. All texts can be searched fully, but
                                    to retrieve the content intelligently a flexible keyword system
                                    based on thesaurus lists is used. Each text may be associated
                                    with any number of keywords; single keywords as well as entire
                                    thesauri can be modified and added at any time without touching
                                    the main data tables. The keywords can be structured
                                    hierarchically, so that a search for "Tuscany" will also return
                                    those entries which were only associated with the keywords
                                    "Florence" or "Pisa."
                                A main goal is ease of use: All entry, modification and data
                                    maintenance is done from Microsoft
                                    Word, while the material may be searched and viewed
                                    through a web browser. Data collections can be accessed locally,
                                    but also via Internet from all over the world. Accordingly, WIRE
                                    has a multilingual user interface (currently you can switch
                                    between German and English; French, Italian and Latin are
                                    planned). WIRE is not suited for highly specific databases with
                                    many fields which require complex query strategies; in order to
                                    achieve simplicity and flexibility some compromises are made.
                                    Anyway, the collected material can be exported to other
                                    databases using standard SQL commands; exporting into
                                    standardized XML format is planned, thereby ensuring the future
                                    value of the collected data.
                            
                            
                                4. The Realization
                                
                                    Database design
                                    Every project that is realized in WIRE is an independent,
                                        internet-accessible database that contains the complete data
                                        (except for the image files which are stored in separate
                                        directories). The three categories of source material and
                                        the accompanying texts are stored in predefined tables
                                        (which can be customized later). The bibliographic table has
                                        the characteristic fields, while the image table contains
                                        filenames and short identification tags. Each keyword list
                                        is stored in a separate table; one of its fields denotes the
                                        position of the entry in the hierarchy. To guarantee speed
                                        and consistency, all links between documents and keywords
                                        are stored in one heavily indexed table. Table definitions
                                        and individual customizations are kept in a configuration
                                        script and can be easily modified.
                                
                                
                                    Software
                                    WIRE is realized with robust, ubiquitous and inexpensive
                                        software. The Swedish open-source product MySQL serves as its database
                                        engine, whereas for internet querying the free web server
                                            Xitami is used. The script
                                        modules that combine both are written in Perl, a widely-used free
                                        programming language. In the future it will be possible to
                                        install the system and to create individual databases
                                        through user-friendly routines. A special document template
                                        for Microsoft Word helps to
                                        input the data and to manage the database, so that
                                        researchers won't have to leave their familiar working
                                        environment. The formatting is converted into HTML code and
                                        inserted into the database along with the unencoded text
                                        which is used for searching. Except for the Word interface WIRE runs on other
                                        operating systems, too.
                                
                            
                            
                                5. The Users
                                WIRE is being designed for art historians, but it may be useful
                                    in other disciplines of the humanities, too. It could serve
                                    students and teachers alike, whether they work together in
                                    research projects or on their own in seminars. Students could
                                    present their papers using WIRE and at the same time preserve
                                    and maintain the material for future use. Currently it is
                                    already in use at Trier University as a platform for half a
                                    dozen projects, some of which are dependent on international
                                    collaboration.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        Publications
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            Martin
                                            Raspe
                                        
                                    
                                    WIRE - ein Instrument zur Materialsammlung in
                                        den Bildwissenschaften
                                
                                
                                    EVA 2001 Berlin (Electronic Imaging &amp;
                                        the Visual Arts), Konferenzband
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                        [forthcoming]
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Title C: Towards the User: The Digital Edition of the Deutsche Wörterbuch by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm
                        Ruth Christmann, M.A.
                        Thomas Schares, M.A. 
                        
                            
                                
                                    1. Starting position, targets:
                                    The Deutsche Wörterbuch (DWB) by
                                        Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm is the most important dictionary to
                                        the German language. Begun in 1838 and completed in 1971
                                        with the publication of an index volume to the numerous
                                        sources quoted within the DWB, it is a chief stock for
                                        scholarly study of the German language and comparable to the
                                        importance of the OED for the English-speaking world.
                                    In November 1998, a team of lexicographers and computer
                                        scientists started to develop a digitized version of the
                                        DWB, taking into account the needs of academic researchers
                                        wanting to cope with the huge amount of data. This is, and
                                        always has been, a task not too easily performed, as the DWB
                                        is used by students of German, historians, lexicographers,
                                        and philologists of all disciplines.
                                    The DWB consists of 32 volumes and one index volume. It fills
                                        altogether 33,872 pages in folio-format, contains ca.
                                        250.000 main entries, the number of printed characters
                                        amounts to 300 million. (Compare the 2nd Edition of the OED:
                                        21,730 pages, 231,000 main entries, 350 million printed
                                        characters). The printed dictionary has been made
                                        machine-readable by a Chinese company and has been completed
                                        in October 2000. After having received the first files from
                                        China we started to insert SGML-markup compliant to the TEI
                                        guidelines into the dictionary. First we decided on marking
                                        up two volumes that were published in the 1950s, as the last
                                        volumes published have a fairly uniform structure.
                                        Afterwards the procedures developed for these volumes were
                                        applied to the other volumes successively, starting from the
                                        first volume which had been published in 1854.
                                    As a dictionary retrodigitization project, we do not have to
                                        cope with different classes of information or media. What we
                                        need to do is digitize dictionary entries, which exist
                                        already in a final state and - what is by no means trivial
                                        -, give users a firm grip on what they are looking for
                                        within the dictionary without restraining them by supplying
                                        unsuitable means for information retrieval.
                                
                                
                                    2. Necessity for retrodigitization: Beyond the scope of
                                        the printed dictionary
                                    From the very beginning of the project, it was our aim to
                                        anticipate the needs of the average user of the DWB. As the
                                        DWB has complicated and heterogeneous structures as a result
                                        of nearly one and a half centuries of philological research
                                        and lexicography which determine the dictionary's contents
                                        and structure, the access to the printed version of the DWB
                                        is quite complicated: Not only does the user have to consult
                                        more than one volume in most cases, as the DWB is full of
                                        cross-references to other parts of the dictionary or to
                                        certain columns within the same entry which may be found
                                        dozens of pages apart from each other. The reader is also
                                        confronted with the difficulty to find exactly those
                                        paragraphs within an entry he is interested in, e.g. the
                                        exact meaning he is looking for: Due to the long time it
                                        took to complete the DWB, the entries are very
                                        heterogeneously structured, and hierarchical elements vary
                                        according to different underlying entry structures and often
                                        serve different purposes.
                                    Therefore, a digitized version of the DWB has to take into
                                        account these problems and in the first place has to
                                        facilitate a convenient access to the dictionary entries.
                                        Second, the graphical user interface (GUI) has to support an
                                        effective orientation within and a sophisticated navigation
                                        through the dictionary, it should make it easy to follow up
                                        cross-references within entries as well as within the
                                        dictionary as a whole.
                                
                                
                                    3. User-oriented approach to data via the DWB GUI
                                    The DWB GUI is designed to make use of the special riches of
                                        the dictionary and to provide a comfortable access to its
                                        contents. It offers various possibilities for simple
                                        headword search and provides a wide range of information to
                                        chosen entries. It gives for example the exact reference
                                        where in the printed dictionary is the entry located,
                                        furthermore who is the author of the entry (more than 150
                                        lexicographers participated in the making of the DWB) and
                                        when did it appear in print (an important information for
                                        evaluating the entry's contents with regard to historical
                                        circumstances) etc. The - often cryptic - bibliographical
                                        information within the dictionary referring to the sources
                                        of the quotations is being made comprehensible by
                                        interlinking it with the dictionary's index volume that
                                        shows the sigla with their full bibliographical information.
                                    A special feature of the DWB is the great number of very long
                                        entries: the DWB has more than 50 entries consisting of more
                                        than 50 columns and more than 200 entries consisting of 5 or
                                        more columns, about 40 percent of the dictionary contents
                                        consist of entries of five or more columns length. For ease
                                        of reference, the GUI is provided with a window section
                                        which visualizes the hierarchical structure of long entries,
                                        especially in the sense section. For this purpose, the
                                        various numbers and characters indicating sections and
                                        sub-sections - there are up to nine sub-sections - are
                                        ordered according to a structure resembling a family tree.
                                        This overview is based on the far-reaching markup that takes
                                        into account and describes the various functions of numbers
                                        and characters representing the structural elements of an
                                        entry.
                                    This special feature enables users to enhance his search
                                        strategies considerably by offering them this window with an
                                        overview of the contents of an entry. From this table of
                                        contents, users may look up the various 'chapters' of an
                                        entry. A more detailed description of this special feature
                                        shows the goal of the design of the DWB GUI: It will offer
                                        an easy access to the dictionary contents by taking into
                                        account and encoding all the essential features of the
                                        dictionary.
                                
                                
                                    4. The DWB retrieval mask
                                    The electronic DWB will also be provided with a powerful
                                        search retrieval tool. In addition to the basic features of
                                        fulltext search and Boolean search, there is the possibility
                                        of complex queries. These are carried out by making use of
                                        the structural encoding of the dictionary's data. All key
                                        elements and sections of an entry have been encoded
                                        according to their structural positions in order to retrieve
                                        as much information as possible.
                                    At present, searches in the electronic DWB are still limited
                                        to headwords, word class (part of speech), languages
                                        especially in the etymology section, quotations from poetic
                                        sources and bibliographical information on these.
                                        Nevertheless, even now a user interested in word formation
                                        and the author Goethe may start
                                        a complex query to find all entries to adverbial derivations
                                        with the suffix -lich which
                                        contain at least one quotation by Goethe. The user will
                                        combine the search for "G*the" (according to the variant
                                        spellings "oe" or "ö") entered in the field for author/work
                                        which is linked to the index volume, "*lich" in the field
                                        for the headword, and "adv" in the field for word class. The
                                        result will list all the relevant entries within the
                                        dictionary. This may serve as an example for complex search
                                        strategies which will be made possible in the electronic
                                        version of the DWB.
                                
                                
                                    5. The future of digitization and research
                                    By now, volumes 1 to 9 and volumes 27 to 32 have been encoded
                                        according to SGML/TEI and since Jan. 2002 been made
                                        available on the Internet.
                                    At the time of the conference, the complete DWB will be fully
                                        encoded and accessible for searches described above.
                                        Furthermore, PDF files have been designed to represent the
                                        printed dictionary, these will also be accessible. We will
                                        give some details as to the problems that had to be solved
                                        when aiming at an exact representation of the character-sets
                                        (Greek, Hebrew and others) on different platforms.
                                    Questions to be discussed when presenting the DWB may focus
                                        on future necessities of encoding the DWB and of data
                                        encoding in general, especially in connection with the
                                        question of user needs. This may also include a comparison
                                        of the DWB to at least one major digitized dictionary on
                                        historical principles, the Oxford English Dictionary (OED)
                                        which is comparable in size and structure.
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            Literature
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Thomas
                                                Burch
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Ruth
                                                Christmann
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Vera
                                                Hildenbrandt
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Thomas
                                                Schares
                                            
                                        
                                        Ein “Hausbuch” für alle? Das Deutsche Wörterbuch der Brüder
                                            Grimm auf CD-ROM und im Internet
                                    
                                    
                                        Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie
                                        
                                            2
                                            
                                            11-34
                                            2000
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Thomas
                                                Burch
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Kurt
                                                Gärtner
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Thomas
                                                Schares
                                            
                                        
                                        Das digitale Deutsche
                                                Wörterbuch der Brüder Grimm
                                    
                                    
                                         Mitteilungen des Deutschen
                                            Germanistenverbandes
                                        
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            Forthcoming in 2002
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Ruth
                                                Christmann
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Vera
                                                Hildenbrant
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Thomas
                                                Schares
                                            
                                        
                                        Ein “heiligthum der sprache” digitalisiert:
                                            Das Deutsche Wörterbuch von
                                            Jacob und Wilhelm Grimm auf CD-ROM und im
                                        Internet
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Nicolás
                                                Castrillo Benito
                                             et al 
                                        Tagungsband der ITUG-Jahrestagung 1999 in
                                            Burgos: TUSTEP educa
                                        
                                            Burgos
                                            
                                            2002
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Ruth
                                                Christmann
                                            
                                        
                                        Books into Bytes: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm's
                                                Deutsches Wörterbuch on
                                            CD-ROM and on the Internet
                                    
                                    
                                        Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                                        
                                            16
                                            2
                                            121-133
                                            2001
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Vera
                                                Hildenbrandt
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Thomas
                                                Schares
                                            
                                        
                                        Das Grimmsche Wörterbuch geht ins 21.
                                            Jahrhundert: Präsentation eines Prototyps des digitalen
                                                Deutschen Wörterbuchs von
                                            Jacob und Wilhelm Grimm
                                        
                                            
                                            
                                            ().
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Ruth
                                                Kersting
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Andrea
                                                Rapp
                                            
                                        
                                        Mein schönes Fräulein ... Bedeutungs- und
                                            Bezeichnungswandel in Wortfeldern anhand des Grimmschen
                                            Wörterbuchs
                                    
                                    
                                        Praxis Deutsch
                                        
                                            165
                                            
                                            54-59
                                            2001
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        Homepage:
                                        
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
