


    
        
            
                Structure of the Frequency of Occurrence of Consonants
                    in the Speech Sound Chain as an Indicator of the Phono-Typological Closeness of
                    Languages
                
                    
                        Yuri
                        Tambovtsev
                        
                            Novosibirsk University
                            YUTAMB@HOTMAIL.COM
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                 The structure of the frequency of occurrence of consonants in the speech sound
                    chain can be a good indicator of the typological closeness of languages from the
                    phonetic point of view.
                A human being can realise that this or that language sounds closer to his own
                    native language without understanding the meaning. At the stage when it is hard
                    to teach computer to understand a human language, it is quite possible to make
                    it recognise the sound closeness of a language to this or that language on the
                    basis of the analysis of its sound speech chain. We have computed the frequency
                    of phonemic occurrence of 112 world languages as a teaching sample for the
                    computer. Then we took Japanese as a token language. The computer had to analyse
                    the sound chain of a language and then to put it closer to some languages and
                    far away from the others, basing on the frequency of occurrence of certain
                    consonantal groups. We have chosen Japanese because it is not categorically
                    assigned to any language family. It is still considered a genetically isolated
                    language. Therefore, it is useful to have some additional information about it
                    in any aspect. In this project we have used the procedures which are usually
                    used in pattern recognition.
                Japanese, as any other human language, has a specific structure of the speech
                    sound chain. It can be distinguished by its structure from any other language.
                    Every language has a unique structure of distributions of speech sounds in its
                    phonemic chain. The distribution of Japanese vowels will not be considered till
                    the second stage of the investigation. Let's point out that consonants bear the
                    semantic load in the word, not vowels. Therefore, it is more possible to
                    understand the meaning of the message by consonants, rather by vowels. However,
                    if we fail to recognise and distinguish two languages, then we resort to the
                    structure of occurrence of vowels in the speech sound chain. While comparing
                    languages, it is necessary to keep to the principle of commensurability. Having
                    it in mind, it is not possible to compare languages on the basis of the
                    frequency of occurrence of separate phonemes, because the sets of phonemes in
                    languages are usually different. The articulartory features may serve as the
                    basic features in phono-typological reasoning. First of all, it is the
                    classification of consonants according to the work of the active organ of speech
                    or place of articulation (4 features). Secondly, it is the classification from
                    the point of view of the manner of articulation or the type of the obstruction
                    (3 features). Thirdly, it is the classification according to the work of the
                    vocal cords (1 feature). In this way, 8 basic features are obtained: 1) labial;
                    2) front; 3) mediolingual or palatal; 4) back or velar; 5) sonorant; 6)
                    occlusive; 7) fricative; and 8) voiced consonants. One should take the values of
                    the frequency of occurrence of these 8 features in the speech chain of Japanese
                    and compare them to those of the other languages. On the basis of the
                    "chi-square" test and Euclidean distance, we have developed our own method of
                    measuring the phono-typological distances between languages (Tambovtsev, 1994-a;
                    1994-b; 2001-a; 2001-b). It takes into account the frequency of occurrence of
                    the 8 consonantal groups mentioned above and builds up the overwhelming mosaic
                    of the language sound picture. Having compared Japanese to some languages, we
                    received the following phono-typological distances: Japanese - Ujgur (6.77);
                    Japanese - Nanaj (8.12); Japanese - Jakut (8.26); Japanese - See Dajak (8.86);
                    Japanese - Kazah (9.02); Japanese - Turkish (9.05); Japanese - Ket (9.52);
                    Japanese - Baraba Tatar (9.76); Japanese - Uzbek (10.63); Japanese - Hausa
                    (10.98); Japanese - Georgean (11.05); Japanese - Kazan Tatar (11.07) and so on.
                    One can see, that Ujgur, Jakut, Kazah, Turkish, Baraba Tatar, Uzbek and Kazan
                    Tatar are Turkic languages. Nanaj is a Tungus-Manchurian language. Therefore,
                    one can notice that Japanese is closer to the so-called Altaic languages which
                    include Turkic, Mongolian and Tungus-Manchurian languages. All in all 112
                    languages were compared to Japanese. We can't show all the distances measured
                    here for the lack of space. However, the maximum distances were found for
                    Japanese - German (22,24); Japanese - English (19.83); Japanese - Rumanian
                    (15,08) and Japanese - Swedish (17.03). Thus, one can see that the consonantal
                    distribution pattern in Japanese and Germanic languages is rather different. As
                    a conclusion, we can state that speech sound picture of Japanese is also far
                    away from the languages which are geographically close: Chinese, Nivh, Itelmen
                    or Indonesian. It was a surprise to us. Our data state that the speech sound
                    pattern of Japanese resembles that of Ujgur - one of the Turkic languages spoken
                    in the Middle Asia. The Ujgur people are often linked to the Old Turkic tribes,
                    who used to live in the stepps of Southern Russia before the Tatar-Mongols
                    captured them in the IXth century A.D. We must point out that it is not a
                    coincidence since the other native Altaic people have a very similar data of
                    closeness to Japanese. Turkic and Tungus-Manchurian tribes may have had a sort
                    of common origin with Japanese. It may verify the Altaic hypothesis of Japanese
                    origin. It is especially vivid, when the Austro-Oceanic and other languages do
                    not show such a closeness.

            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Yuri
                                    Tambovtsev
                                
                            
                            Dinamika funktsionorovanija fonem v zvukovyh tsepochkah
                                jazykov razlichnogo stroja
                            
                                Novosibirsk
                                Novosibirskij GosUniversitet
                                1994-a
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Yuri
                                    Tambovtsev
                                
                            
                            Tipologija uporjadochennosti zvukovyh tsepej v jazyke
                            
                                Novosibirsk
                                Novosibirskij GosUniversitet
                                1994-b
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Yuri
                                    Tambovtsev
                                
                            
                            Kompendium osnovnyh statisticheskih harakteristik
                                funktsionirovanija soglasnyh fonem v zvukovoj tsepochke anglijskogo,
                                nemetskogo, frentsuzskogo i drugih indoevropejskih jazykov
                            
                                Novosibirsk
                                Novosibirskij klassicheskij institut
                                2001-a
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Yuri
                                    Tambovtsev
                                
                            
                            Funktsionirovanie soglasnyh fonem v zvukovoj tsepochke
                                uralo-altajskih jazykov
                            
                                Novosibirsk
                                Novosibirskij klassicheskij institut
                                2001-b
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Yuri
                                    Tambovtsev
                                
                            
                            Nekotorye teoreticheskie polozhenija tipologii
                                upor'adochennosti fonem v zvukovoj tsepochke jazyka i kompendium
                                statisticheskih harakteristik osnovnyh grupp soglasnyh fonem
                            
                                Novosibirsk
                                Novosibirsk klassicheskij institut
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
