


    
        
            
                Element classes in contextually specified document
                    structures
                
                    
                        Felix
                        Sasaki
                        
                            University of Bielefeld
                            felix.sasaki@uni-bielefeld.de
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of T端bingen
                
                T端bingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    A common problem in the design of document grammars is to define a content
                        model which is not too specific, but also not too general. Within the
                        framework of DTDs, the user is able to specify the content model of an
                        element like this:
                        &lt;!ELEMENT word (prefix*, stem+, suffix*)&gt;
                    This declaration is general enough to annotate word structure in languages
                        with a agglutination system. But it is not possible to divide words in
                        several classes, for example a class with words owning one obligatory prefix
                        or a class with words for which the prefix is optional. If one is able to
                        define the classes before the process of document creation starts, the
                        problem might be solved with declarations like the following:
                        &lt;!ELEMENT word1 (prefix, stem+,suffix*)&gt; 
                            &lt;!ELEMENT word2 (prefix?, stem+,suffix*)&gt;
                    Three problems remain. First, the user might want to use just one element for
                        words, not a single declaration for each class of word structures. Second,
                        the classes might be not defined by the content model, but by the context in
                        which they appear. An example would be an adjective as an predicate ('Das
                        Bier ist kalt') vs. adjectives as noun modifiers ('das kalte Bier'), which
                        show different inflectional patterns. Third, the classification of elements
                        might emerge during the annotation process or while analyzing the document.
                        For software or the user, this is too late to change the document
                    grammar.
                
                
                    Approach of this paper
                    To solve these problems, a conceptual and physical separation has to be made.
                        The document grammar, written within the DTD format or using other schema
                        languages, contains the most general declaration of a content model like the
                        one above. Another document contains the declaration of element classes,
                        defining alternative structural restrictions for the same elements, i.e.
                        putting restrictions on their context in the document structure. The
                        structure of such a document can be as follows:
                        &lt;classlist mode="default"&gt;
                            
                            &lt;class scopus="word"&gt;
                            
                            &lt;caterpillar&gt;
                            
                            &lt;moveTest direction="First"&gt;prefix&lt;/moveTest&gt;
                            
                            &lt;/caterpillar&gt;
                            
                            &lt;/class&gt;
                            
                            &lt;class scopus="word"&gt;
                            
                            &lt;caterpillar&gt;
                            
                            &lt;moveTest direction="First"&gt;&lt;/moveTest&gt;
                            
                            &lt;/caterpillar&gt;
                            
                            &lt;caterpillar&gt;
                            
                            &lt;moveTest direction="first"&gt;prefix&lt;/moveTest&gt;
                            
                            &lt;/caterpillar&gt;
                            
                            &lt;/class&gt;
                            
                            &lt;/classlist&gt;
                            
                    This document we may call 'class specification document' (CSD). It is
                        declaring caterpillar expressions, a context specification technique (cf.
                        Br端ggemann-Klein et al. 2000) which is working with basic moves
                        (up,left,right,first) and basic tests (isFirst, isLast, isLeaf, isRoot). The
                        caterpillars are organized in classes. Two classes are necessary to divide
                        the content models above: the first class holds for the word1-content model,
                        the second class for the word2-content model. The "scopus" element defines
                        to which element the classes are applied. The meaning of the "mode"
                        attribute will be explained below.
                
                
                    Areas of usage: Validation, generation and exploration of classes
                    A CSD might be used in two ways. First, as a supplement to a valid document -
                        in the sense that the document follows the requirements made by a document
                        grammar -, the CSD can be used to test if the document is valid to some
                        element classes, too. Different to document grammars written in schema
                        languages like DTD or XML Schema (cf. Thompson et al. 01), this validation
                        process is working upon partial document structures, validating only element
                        classes declared in the CSD. Also, the classes contain several declarations
                        for the same element, so that a general type of the element can be defined
                        and several subtypes, which inherit the characteristics of the super-type.
                        For example, it is possible to define a general pattern for words, e.g. a
                        stem followed by an optional suffix, and several subtypes, e.g. a stem
                        followed by certain suffixes in certain orders.
                    Second, a CSD can also be used to generate classes. This process will be as
                        follows: The user defines some classes in a CSD and sets the attribute
                        "mode" to the value "class generation". The result will be a subset of
                        classes that is in accordance to the classes defined. This generation of
                        classes can be regarded as the exploration of an unknown domain. As in the
                        examples above, the morphological structure of unknown languages is often
                        explored using hypothesis about patterns common to many languages. A very
                        general document grammar representing such patterns could be the starting
                        point of research. With annotated corpora of the language, various
                        hypothesis about the structure might be formulated as a CSD and tested.
                
                
                    Related work
                    The approach of this paper is related to two fields of research, certain
                        annotation schemes and schema languages. In the first field, as a part of
                        the Text Encoding Initiative (Sperberg-McQueen et al. 1994), the proposal
                        for the declaration of feature structures is a useful approach for the
                        declaration of general data structures. The constructions allowed by a CSD
                        are - in one way - a subset of a feature structure. As a difference to
                        feature structures, a CSD allows for moves. Another set of annotation
                        schemes, specialized for dialogue annotation, was developed during the MATE
                        project. A special focus was put upon the annotation of relations between
                        certain levels of annotation, for example morphological units and dialogue
                        acts. The same is true for a CSD. The difference between these two
                        approaches is that in the MATE project, a single document contains only one
                        level of annotation, connected to other layers with pointing mechanisms like
                        XLink (DeRose et al. 2000).
                    In the second field, schema languages like Schematron seem to be very similar
                        to CSD. Schematron can be used in the same way, as an supplement for
                        validating documents with a method going beyond common schema languages. The
                        difference is that Schematron is making use of XPATH-expressions to validate
                        document structures. The advantage of XPATH (Clark et al. 1999) is the
                        ability to navigate to any place in the document structure. This seems to be
                        a disadvantage as well: with Schematron, it is not possible to write
                        grammars about documents in a formal sense, because the XPATH Syntax is too
                        unrestrictive. The CSD is restricted to the caterpillars as the only set of
                        expressions. This makes it possible to describe the execution of most of the
                        caterpillar expressions as deterministic, finite-state automata.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Br端ggemann-Klein
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Wood
                                
                            
                            Caterpillars: A context specification technique
                        
                        
                            Markup Languages
                            
                                1
                                2
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Clark
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    DeRose
                                
                            
                            XML Path Language (XPath)
                            Version 1.0. W3C Recommendation 16 November 1999
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    DeRose
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    Maler
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Orchard
                                
                            
                            XML Linking Language (XLink)
                            Version 1.0. W3C Recommendation 27 June 2001
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            MATE - Multilevel Annotation, Tools Engineering
                            Telematics Project LE4-8370
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        See .
                    
                    
                        
                            Schematron - An XML Structure Validation Language using
                                Patterns in Trees
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        See .
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Lou
                                    Burnard
                                
                            
                            Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange
                                (TEIP3)
                            
                                Oxford
                                Oxford University Computing Services
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    S.
                                    Thompson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Beech
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Mahoney
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    N.
                                    Mendelsohn
                                
                            
                            XML Schema Part 1: Structures
                            W3C Recommendation 2 May 2001
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
