


    
        
            
                Systemic Functional Hypertexts
                
                    
                        Alexander
                        Mehler
                        
                            University of Trier
                            mehler@uni-trier.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Rodney
                        Clarke
                        
                            University of Wollongong
                            rclarke@uow.edu.au
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of T체bingen
                
                T체bingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Although texts exist in social contexts, models of hypertext authoring
                        generally exclude this aspect of the structure and function of texts.
                        Readers and writers require situational and cultural contexts in order to
                        understand the meanings negotiated in texts. These contexts are generally
                        ignored because of the lack of any language model underlying hypertext
                        authoring or the models used do not reflect relationships between text and
                        context. In this paper we describe how Systemic Functional Linguistics can
                        be used to create Systemic Functional Hypertexts
                        (SFHT), which includes many aspects omitted from conventional models: (i)
                        text forming resources, (ii) intra- and intertextual relations occurring
                        within their (iii) situational and cultural contexts. SFHTs are described
                        with the help of the unified modeling language.
                
                
                    1 Introduction
                    According to Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL; Halliday 1978; Martin
                        1992) texts are produced/received as functional units in patterns of
                        wordings and grammar dependent on social context. Within SFL, 'context' is
                        theorized using a bistratal organization of genre and register: whereas
                        registers manifest variety according to situational use, genres correspond
                        to the staging of social processes as part of the context of culture. It is
                        a fundamental insight of SFL that the constitutive dependence of text on
                        context is bilateral. That is registers (genres) are not only instantiated,
                        but also constituted by means of texts. This relation of mutual dependence
                        can be observed on the basis of covariation of
                        textual and contextual features (Lemke 1995). According to this view,
                        changes in context are correlated with changes in texture (i.e.
                        lexico-grammatical choices). Thus, covariation can be used as a source for
                        predicting intertextual relations: the more similar two registers (genres),
                        the stronger their dependence, the higher the probability that their textual
                        realizations are intertextually related.
                    From this perspective, hypertext authoring becomes crucial in the sense that
                        it has to reflect the contextsensitivity of intertextual relations in order
                        to offer their readers value-added information. The perspective of
                        traditional two-level-hypertext systems (Mayfield 1997) does not suffice,
                        since it only formally distinguishes representational formats for the
                        derivation of links and their presentation without taking context layers
                        into account. What is needed is a system which does not only allow to model
                            thematic progression (Kuhlen 1991), and adaptivity to varying situational, user centered
                        views (Kuhlen 1994), but also genres and registers and
                            their covariation with texture. In the following, the integration
                        of these perspectives (i.e. hypertextual superstructures and
                        contextsensitivity) on the basis of SFL is described using the concept of
                        systemic functional hypertext.
                
                
                    2 Systemic Functional Hypertexts
                    Applying SFL to hypertext relates to the question of how
                            to specify which links of which textual units on the background of which
                            linguistic and social semiotic entities. In order to approximate
                        an answer, the concept of Systemic Functional
                            Hypertext (SFHT) is introduced as an n-level hypertext system
                        which includes at least a genre layer (for
                        modeling genres, their constituents and staging), a register layer (for modeling registers, their constituents and
                        accessibility constraints), a texture layer (for
                        modeling types of texture forming resources, their syntagmatic and
                        paradigmatic dependencies and linguistic realizations patterns), and a text layer (for modeling intertextual relations of
                        texts as links in hypertext). Whereas the first three layers describe
                        different resources for text linkage, the last layer deals with the
                        organization of concrete links.
                    
                        2.1 Systemic Functional Links
                        In SFHT the concept of a link is concretized in two respects: (i) links
                            are introduced as a kind of sign. (ii) This
                            allows to ask for the role of links in the superisation (i.e. constitution) of higher level signs and
                            their communicative function. To be more
                            concrete: whereas the expression plane of a
                                systemic functional link (SFLink) is
                            given by its surface structural manifestation by means of anchor,
                            reference, and referent, its content plane
                            is determined by the intertextual relations it expresses. Since these
                            relations are seen to co-vary with relations of genres and registers
                            contextualizing social (communicative) processes, the view of SFLinks as
                            being signs allows to introduce the concept of function in hypertext. To take a step forward in specifying
                            SFLinks, two dimensions are distinguished:
                                1. Foundation: does a link
                                    manifest linguistic cohesion or
                                        situational and generic
                                        coherence of textual reference and referent?
                                2. Structure formation: does a
                                    link associate pairs of texts or
                                    does it participate in chains of
                                    interlinked texts as manifestations of systemic functional
                                    progressions?
                            
                        Based on these criteria, several types of links can be distinguished: At
                            the lower end purely associative, context-insensitive links are
                            distinguished-the typical case of links produced in the area of
                            automatic hypertext authoring (Salton et al. 1993). The construction of
                            lexically cohesive as well as path sensitive links has an intermediary
                            status. More coherent links are produced if context layers are taken
                            into account. Thus, on the upper end of the matrix situational as well
                            as generic coherent, contextsensitive paths of interlinked texts which
                            serve to manifest systemic functional progressions are
                            distinguished.
                        The systemic functional perspective chosen to reconstruct the concept of
                            hypertext allows to reflect the specific complexity of signs. Instead of
                            describing SFHT by means of contextfree rule systems, contextsensitivity
                            is taken as the starting point. Following this premise, several moments
                            of informational uncertainty can be distinguished as necessary
                            conditions for the functional impact of SFHT: (i) Contextsensitivity: the same link may have multiple
                            linguistic, situational and generic sources (polymorphism). (ii) Polyfunctionality: the same link may be used
                            to link different contextual units. (iii) Vagueness: the source of a link may be vague, dissonant,
                            fuzzy, etc. (iv) Ambiguity: the same
                            reference can be linked with different referents. (v) Dynamics: links may disappear, emerge or
                            modify as the text base grows. These moments of complexity correlate
                            with the constitution of social semiotic entities on the background of
                            emerging/disappearing usage regularities of signs. SFHTs serve to make
                            explicit this co-variation of linguistic and
                            social semiotic system.
                    
                
                
                    3 Conceptual Modeling
                    In order to make hypertext more sensitive to the situational and cultural
                        context the operationalization of the concept of SFHT is needed. Beyond
                        formalization it is conceptual modeling which
                        precedes their algorithmization and implementation. This paper presents a
                        conceptual model of SFHT using the unified modeling language (UML). Besides
                        structural aspects including the enumeration and specification of
                        constituents of the linguistic and social system, dynamic aspects of SFHT
                        are modeled, too. Structural building blocks of SFHTs including genres,
                        registers, texture forming resources, intratextual/intertextual relations,
                        systemic functional progressions, links and paths are interrelated.
                        Furthermore, co-variation and co-evolvement of text and context are
                        described as procedural building blocks. The conceptual model is used as a
                        starting point for the specification of data structures and algorithms for
                        the computer-based implementation of SFHT systems.
                
                
                    4 Conclusion
                    This paper applies SFL to the area of hypertext authoring based on the
                        manifold covariation of social and linguistic system, which allows the same
                        text to be embedded into different contexts and thus to have different
                        functions. In order to reflect this moment of polymorphism and
                        polyfunctionality, the concept of SFHT and their main building blocks are
                        described. On this background, three principal conclusions can be drawn:
                            1. Because of the dependence of human information processing on
                                varying cognitive, situational, and social contexts, a given text
                                corpus does not have a static, predefined hypertext structure. Thus,
                                text conversion demands a fundamental reconstruction of the concept
                                of hypertext from the perspective of a sociosemiotic theory of
                                discourse which views this dynamics as a precondition for
                                (hyper-)texts to be functional.
                            2. This reconstruction is necessarily interdisciplinary in the
                                sense that it includes insights from semiotics, linguistics and
                                social as well as computer science.
                            3. The concept of SFHT, used to formally manifest this
                                reconstruction, demands a stepwise operationalizing in order to
                                prepare its implementation. For this sake, UML is used, since it
                                allows to model structural and procedural aspects of SFHTs.
                        
                     Thus, this paper contributes to the reconstruction of hypertext from a
                        semiotic point of view, or more concretely: from the perspective of
                        computational semiotics.
                
            
        
        Bibliography
        
            
                
                    
                        M.
                        A.
                        K.
                        Halliday
                    
                
                Language as Social Semiotic
                
                    London
                    Edward Arnold Publishers
                    1978
                
            
            
                
                    
                        R.
                        Kuhlen
                    
                
                Hypertext: ein nichtlineares Medium zwischen Buch und Wissensbank
                
                    Berlin
                    Springer
                    1991
                
            
            
                
                    R.
                        Kuhlen
                    Ann채herung an Informationsutopien 체ber offene Hypertextsysteme
                
                
                    
                        
                            R.
                            Wille
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            M.
                            Zickwolff
                        
                    
                    Begriffliche Wissensverarbeitung: Grundlagen und Aufgaben
                    
                        Mannheim [u.a.]
                        Bibliographisches Institut
                        1994
                        191-224
                    
                
            
                
                    J.
                        L.Lemke
                    Intertextuality and Text Semantics
                
                
                    
                        
                            P.
                            H.
                            Fries
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            M.
                            Gregory
                        
                    
                    Discourse in Society: Systemic Functional Perspectives
                    
                        Norwood
                        Ablex Publishing
                        1995
                    
                
            
                
                    
                        J.
                        R.
                        Martin
                    
                
                English Text. System and Structure
                
                    Philadelphia
                    John Benjamins
                    1992
                
            
            
                
                    J.
                       Mayfield
                    Two-Level Models of Hypertext
                
                
                    
                        
                            C.
                            Nicholas
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            J.
                            Mayfield
                        
                    
                    Intelligent Hypertext: Advanced Techniques for the World Wide Web
                    
                        Berlin
                        Springer
                        1997
                        90-108
                    
                
            
                
                    G.
                        Salton
                    J.
                        Allan
                    C.
                        Buckley
                    Approaches to Passage Retrieval in Full Text Information Systems
                
                
                    ACM-SIGIR '93
                    
                        
                        
                        1993
                        49-58
                    
                
        
    
