


    
        
            
                Music Information Retrieval: Examining what we mean by
                    success.
                
                    
                        J.
                        Stephen
                        Downie
                        
                            Graduate School of Library and Information
                                Science, University of Illinois at
                                Urbana-Champaign
                            jdownie@uiuc.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Music information retrieval (MIR) research has been a part of humanities
                    computing for many years. Kassler (1966) and Lincoln (1967) are both examples of
                    early work in this area. Over the last several years, there has been a resurgent
                    interest in MIR research and development (see ISMIR 2000; ISMIR 2001). Inspired,
                    in part, by the success of the text retrieval research community (e.g.,
                    Yahoo.com, Google.com, Altavista.com, etc.), present-day MIR researchers strive
                    to afford the same kind of content-based access to music. Within the context of
                    music, content-based retrieval implies the use of musical elements to retrieve
                    music objects or specific parts of music objects: Music-based search inputs
                    (e.g., humming, singing, notation excerpts, MIDI keyboard, etc.) to search, and
                    then retrieve, musical works (e.g., recordings, scores, etc.) or to locate
                    sub-components of musical works (e.g., repeating themes and motifs, harmonic
                    progressions, etc.).
                Notwithstanding the promising developments enumerated in the recent MIR
                    literature, MIR systems are still far from being as useful, comprehensive, or
                    robust as their text information retrieval (IR) analogues. There are three
                    principal reasons for this state of affairs.
                First, prompted by educational, governmental, scientific, economic, and military
                    imperatives, the text IR community has for many years garnered substantial
                    financial support which as allowed countless person-hours of effort to be spent
                    on research, development, and evaluation. Until very recently, most MIR research
                    projects have been undertaken primarily as labours of love by devoted scholars.
                    A half-hour's perusal of the back issues of Computing in
                        Musicology (Hewlett and Selfridge-Field, eds.) will bring this fact
                    to the fore.
                Second, music information is inherently more complex than text information. Music
                    information is a multi-faceted amalgam of pitch, tempo, rhythmic, harmonic,
                    timbral, textual (i.e., lyrics and librettti), editorial, praxis, and
                    bibliographic elements. Music can be represented as scores, MIDI files and other
                    discrete encodings, and in any number of analogue and digital audio formats
                    (e.g., LPs, tapes, MP3s, CDs, etc.). Unlike most text, music is extremely
                    plastic; that is, a given piece of music can be transposed, have its rhythms
                    altered, its harmonies reset, its orchestration recast, its lyrics changed, and
                    so on, yet somehow it is still perceived to be the same piece of music. This
                    interaction of music's complexity and plasticity make the selection of possible
                    retrieval elements extraordinarily difficult.
                Third, the text IR community has had a set of standardized performance evaluation
                    metrics for last four decades. Taking the Cranfield evaluations of the early
                    1960's (Cleverdon et al., 1966) as the starting point of modern text IR
                    research, two metrics have to this day continually proved themselves to be
                    particularly important: precision (i.e., the ratio of relevant documents
                    retrieved to the number of documents retrieved) and recall (i.e, the ratio of
                    relevant documents retrieved to the number of relevant documents present in the
                    system). The key determinant in the use of precision and recall as a performance
                    metric is the apprehension of those documents deemed "relevant" to a particular
                    query. While there have been ongoing debates about the nature of "relevance"
                    (see Schamber, 1994), relevance has had relatively stable meaning across the
                    text-IR literature. Simply put, a "document" is deemed to be "relevant" to a
                    given query if the document is "about" the same subject matter as the query.
                    With these metrics, text IR researchers have been able compare and contrast the
                    results of many different retrieval approaches. Thus, promising approaches have
                    been explored more thoroughly, and weaker approaches abandoned. At present,
                    there are no standardized evaluation metrics for MIR. Because of this lack of
                    metrics, MIR researchers have had no means of effectively comparing and
                    contrasting MIR methods. MIR research has not been able to move forward as
                    quickly as it should because it has had no demonstrable basis for concentrating
                    its efforts on better techniques nor for abandoning weaker approaches.
                My poster examines the reasons behind the lack of standardized performance
                    metrics for MIR research and development. Its primary focus is on the
                    suitability of the precision and recall as candidate MIR metrics. Seeing that
                    precision and recall have been instrumental in the success of text IR research,
                    this limited focus is justified. The crux of this explication is the exploration
                    of the nature of "relevance" as it pertains to MIR tasks. The notion of
                    relevance in the MIR context must undergo considerable scrutiny. Without a
                    proper understanding of the applicability, limitations, and implications of
                    relevance, the use of precision and recall as MIR evaluation metrics will not
                    have the theoretical grounding necessary to justify their use by MIR
                    researchers.
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Cleverdon
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Mills
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Keen
                                
                            
                            Factors determining the performance of indexing
                                systems
                            
                                Cranfield, UK
                                ASLIB Cranfield Research Project, College of
                                    Aeronautics
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    W.
                                    B.
                                    Hewellet
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    Selfridge-Field
                                
                            
                            Computing in musicology: A directory of
                                research
                            
                                Menlo Park, CA
                                Center for Computing Assisted Research in the
                                    Humanities
                                (various years)
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                ISMIR 2000
                            
                            The International Symposium on Music Information
                                Retrieval, 23-25 October, 2000, Plymouth, MA
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                        Available at: 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                ISMIR 2001
                            
                            The Second International Symposium on Music Information
                                Retrieval, 15-17 October, 2001, Bloomington, IN
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                        Available at: 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Kassler
                                
                            
                            Toward music information retrieval
                        
                        
                            Perspectives of New Music 
                            
                                4
                                (Spring-Summer)
                                59-67
                                1966
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    B.
                                    Lincoln
                                
                            
                            Some criteria and techniques for developing
                                computerized thematic indices
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Heckman
                                
                            
                            Electronishe datenverarbeitung in der
                                Musikwissenschaft
                            
                                Regensburg
                                Gustave Bosse Verlag.
                                1967
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    L.
                                    Schamber
                                
                            
                            Relevance and information behavior
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    E.
                                    Williams
                                
                            
                            Annual review of information science and
                                technology
                            
                                Medford, NJ
                                Learned Information
                                29
                                
                                3-48
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
