


    
        
            
                Rich Textual Metadata: Implementation and Theory
                
                    
                        Mark
                        Olsen
                        
                            University of Chicago
                            mark@barkov.uchicago.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Textual metadata is widely and extensively supported in various encoding schemes,
                    from the most basic representations such as Simplified Dublin Core to the almost
                    limitless extensions supported by the Text Encoding Initiative. Defined as
                    "structured data about data" metadata functions, in both computerized and
                    non-computerized (such as printed library card catalogues) primarily as means to
                    manage and find information resources. The limits of what might be considered
                    metadata, or more specifically textual metadata, are hazy. Many scholars in the
                    human sciences have used data about text, which might not typically be
                    considered to be metadata, to further analytical objectives. In my own work for
                    example, I have used data about the production and distribution of printed books
                    and the performance of plays to examine "reader response" to texts and to track
                    the "consumption" of text in social, cultural and political contexts.[1] For example, Mark Olsen and Louis-Georges Harvey, "Reading in
                        Revolutionary Times: Book Borrowing from the Harvard College Library,
                        1773-1782," in Harvard Library Bulletin (1993):
                        57-72 and Emmet Kennedy, et. al. Theatre, Opera, and
                            Audiences in Revolutionary Paris: Analysis and Repertory
                        (Greenwood Press, 1996). Rich textual metadata may serve as more than
                    a vital means to manage and find information, but act as a basis for a variety
                    of analytical functions and focus attention back to questions regarding the
                    nature of textuality.
                This paper will first address extensions to the textual object model under
                    PhiloLogic, the "chunky soup model"[2] Leonid Andreev et al,
                        "Re-engineering a War Machine: ARTFL's Encyclopédie" in Literary and Linguistic
                        Computing Vol 14, No. 1 1999, pp. 11-28., in which all
                    elements of textual databases from words to documents may be considered to be
                    objects with attributes. The utility of this model will be demonstrated by
                    reference to databases produced by Alexander Street Press in conjunction with
                    the University of Chicago, which combine a wide array of metadata, full text
                    tools, and hypermedia integration. Finally, the ability to manage an almost
                    unlimited array of textual metadata poses a set of questions about the nature
                    and organization of text and metadata.
                PhiloLogic is a modular system, in which a textbase is really a set of
                    coordinated or related databases, typically including an object database, a word
                    forms database, a word concordance index mapped to textual objects, and an
                    object manager mapping text objects to byte offsets in data files. Each of these
                    databases is stored and managed using its own subsystem. To support a rich
                    textual metadata, I implemented a perl/SQL object manager containing one or more
                    SQL tables with full relational capabilities between them, linked by unique
                    object identifiers to the text data. This unique key is, in most
                    implementations, a logical address of the object. Typically, these are defined
                    in a hierarchy descending from a document down to a word, without reference in
                    the object mapper, to the type of object -- book, chapter, article, dictionary
                    entry, poem, verse, sentence, etc. -- allowing for searching of words in
                    selected objects and navigation up and down the hierarchy. The independence of
                    the object hierarchy from the data associated with it allows for query driven
                    access to any object at any level. Equally, this model supports creation of
                    multiple metadata representations to support different query capabilities into
                    the same textual database.
                The paragraph in Diderot's Encyclopédie, for example,
                    containing the phrase étincelles lumineuses has the
                    logical address: 35:78:0:51, being the 51st child object of the 78th top level
                    object, of the 35th file (or document). The metadata associated with this object
                    is stored in an SQL table points to 35:78 indicating that it is the main article
                        Electricité, by d'Aumont, in the class of
                    knowledge Physique, and is associated with the page
                    object 35:43, the 43rd page object (not the page number which is stored in a
                    related table) of the 35th file. In some databases, an individual file would
                    correspond to a text or document, but this is not required since document
                    definition is built dynamically from the metadata. This model may be extended to
                    any depth of object and associate an arbitrary amount of metadata to any
                    particular object. One may also create of multiple, related, metadata tables to
                    permit handling objects of different granularity and definition.
                    Chadwick-Healy's English Poetry database, for example, may be defined as a
                    collection of volumes of poetry, with the typical metadata, such as author,
                    title of the volume, date of publication. A second "look" into the same database
                    may associate a different SQL table to individual poems, including year of
                    composition, title, and type of poem. The poem "Vpon a Diamond cutt in forme..."
                    in The English and Latin Poems of Sir Robert Ayton...
                    is identified as object 1143:1:44 in the database. Two automatically generated
                    SQL tables support different "looks" into the database, one as "books of poetry"
                    and one as individual "poems", with data corresponding to the level of
                    representation related by unique object identifier.
                The collaboration between the University of Chicago and Alexander Street Press
                    (ASP) to develop large and important textual databases with unprecedented levels
                    of metadata allowed me to implement, test and refine many of PhiloLogic's object
                    and metadata handling capabilities. The currently released databases, North American Women's Letters and Diaries (currently
                    14,700 documents, with a final projected size of over 40,000) and Civil War Letters and Diaries --and those under
                    development including Early Encounters in North
                    America, Black Drama, and American Film Scripts Online -- are each composed of
                    many SQL metadata tables containing of anywhere from 30 to well over 100 fields,
                    associated with textual materials in various ways.
                Complementing normal kinds of metadata one would expect, such as author, date,
                    genre, the editors of each database select different kinds of metadata to be
                    included in the database. Some of these extend direct descriptions of the text,
                    such as the social context of composition, occupation or social status of the
                    author, names of battles or tribes, flora and fauna described, and so on. The
                    databases also make use of extensive document indexing, such as subject,
                    geographic, historical, personal events, and other controlled terminology
                    descriptions of the contents of each document or object. Thus, for example, one
                    can find or search documents referring to Lincoln's assassination where neither
                    the word "Lincoln" nor "assassination" appear. The full paper will present
                    examples of the interaction of rich metadata and full text searching to
                    illustrate the utility of the object model in PhiloLogic and specific
                    theoretical issues.
                The textual object model allows creation of multiple tables to support different
                    looks into a textual database. Tables of chronological events may have data or
                    descriptions regarding battles or encounters with native tribes. Tables of
                    authors, might include number of children or number of marriages, military rank
                    or age at death. These tables may include heterogeneous data types that might
                    not be typically considered to be textual metadata, such as winners and losers
                    of Civil War battles, commanding generals, and even the number of combatants and
                    losses.
                Rich metadata also allows for greater flexibility definition of documents and how
                    texts may be dynamically constructed. To date, ASP implementations are based on
                    relatively small document segments as a basic unit of analysis. Rich metadata
                    allows these small segments to be multi-threaded, providing an arbitrary number
                    of lines of document definition and sequence, including the order in which
                    documents are published in source volumes, letters to and from particular
                    authors across published accounts, or sequence descriptions of particular events
                    such as battles or encounters. Such threading may also serve as a means for
                    handling hypertext/media relations, from one object to another.
                The textual object model outlined here blurs the distinctions between text and
                    context, data and metadata. Metadata may well be found in places least expected,
                    not limited to headers. Consider the type attribute of a line group
                        tag&lt;lg type="Epithalamion"&gt;
                It appears outside of a header but might be considered to be metadata because it
                    is structured data, subsequently added, about the nature of the data contained
                    in the line group. In the textual object model this would be accessed in the
                    same way as any other metadata object, as an element in an SQL table. A rich
                    textual metadata environment opens significant editorial and analytical freedom
                    regarding the appropriate contexts for particular views of textual material and
                    how these might be associated as metadata.
                The ability to manage practically unlimited amounts of multi-tiered metadata in
                    an object oriented model might serve as an example of the intersection of
                    humanities computing and digital librarianship. By adopting and extending
                    indexing practiced by librarians, to include information not typically
                    considered textual metadata, with fulltext analysis from humanities computing,
                    we can further the goals of improving access to materials and introduce new
                    analytical capabilities to large textbases.
            
        
    
