


    
        
            
                Handing it Down: a survey of the use of tradition in
                    French and English from the 16th to the 20th centuries
                
                    
                        Mark
                        Olsen
                        
                            University of Chicago
                            mark@barkov.uchicago.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Tradition is a vital element of all cultures. It serves as central means for the
                    maintenance and propagation of collective or social memory, binding the present
                    to the past in almost innumerable ways. While there is no shortage of studies of
                    particular traditions, it is surprising find that "scholarly analyses of the
                    history and present meaning of the concept of tradition remain remarkably
                        few."Mark Phillips, "What is tradition when it is not
                        'invented'?; an historiographical introduction", in M. Phillips and G.
                        Schochet, eds. Questions of Tradition (University
                        of Toronto Press, forthcoming). Edward Shils made the same claim, 20 years
                        ago, in his ground breaking Tradition (Chicago, 1981). Derived from
                    the Latin traditio, a form of handing property down
                    from one generation to another, the meanings and associations of this term have
                    developed differently in English and French from the early modern period.
                The last decade has been marked by the appearance of an impressive array of very
                    large textual databases containing significant samples of several national
                    literatures. These collections cover many genres and document types, including
                    different kinds of reference works as well as canonical and noncanonical
                    literary holdings, spanning many centuries. The chronological scope and wide
                    coverage of these databases open the possibility of performing systematic
                    analysis of the history of the idea of "tradition" in individual languages and
                    comparisons of the history of this notion between languages.
                The appearance of so many large textual databases has created a new set of
                    problems, which might be thought of as an embarrassment of riches. The number of
                    occurrences of even relatively rare terms can exceed even the most dedicated
                    scholar's ability to review all of the results. As part of the initial work on
                    this project, I implemented two interactive (or real-time) extensions to
                    PhiloLogic that I found useful in grasping "the big picture". The first, based
                    on earlier implementations, allows the user to generate word frequencies and
                    corrected frequencies broken down by time periods. The second is a simple
                    collocation generator which calculates frequencies of all words within a user
                    selected span to the left and right of a keyword with an optional filtering
                    mechanism to eliminate high frequency function words from the report.Susan Hockey provides a useful overview of "collocation" in Electronic Texts in the Humanities, (Oxford, 2000), pp
                        90-91. See also Mark Olsen, "Gender representation and histoire des
                        mentalités: Language and Power in the Trésor de la langue française", in
                            Histoire et measure VI (1991):
                    349-73.
                The broad outlines of the senses of the word tradition provided by the Dictionnaire de l'Academie française (DAF) from the first
                    edition (1694) to the eighth (1932-5) are consistent. The first edition provides
                    3 senses of tradition; a legal term for the delivery
                    of property; a means (voye) of transmission of
                    unwritten knowledge from the past, primarily in a religious context; and the
                    contents of knowledge coming to us by la voye de la
                        Tradition. Two and a half centuries later, the Academy still
                    classified traditionas a term de Jurisprudence et de Liturgie leading the definition with senses
                    drawn from legal and Catholic citations.
                The primacy of the religious cast of tradition in
                    17th century French is confirmed by an examination of the most frequent
                    collocates of tradition, which include e[s]criture, eglise, sainte, and constante.
                    There were, however, non-Catholic traditions could not be accorded the same
                    authority, for which a different, secularized word was used: " Traditive s.f. Il a les mesmes sens que Tradition, mais il
                        ne se dit point dans les matieres de Religion."DAF, 1st edition (1694) vol. 2, p. 583. This
                    non-Catholic "tradition" disappears in later editions of the DAF and appears to
                    loose currency in the language. A search of the ARTFL database reveals 9
                    occurrences dated between 1620-1660 while a search of the Corpus of Philosophy
                    finds 13 citations from the end of the 16th century, and it is found in earlier
                    dictionaries, such as Jean Nicot's Thesor (1606).
                The disappearance of the traditive in the early 18th
                    century is marked by recasting of tradition as a form of knowledge which can be
                    verified, most remarkably by the philosophes, and by
                    the appearance of adjective (traditionel, elle) and adverbial
                    (traditionnellement) forms, suggesting that tradition moves from an identifiable
                    thing to a characteristic. The entries for tradition in the Encyclopédie are classified as being part of "sacred criticism,
                    religion, or law", the article in which the word tradition is most frequently
                    used is Certitude. This article is an examination of
                    the means by which one may achieve certitude morale
                    when assessing knowledge based on reports of witness through three channels
                        canals) or lignes
                        traditionelles, oral, written and monumental.
                
                    Il paroît par ce que j'ai dit jusqu'ici, qu'on doit raisonner sur la
                        tradition comme sur les témoins oculaires. Un fait transmis par une seule
                        ligne traditionelle, ne mérite pas plus notre foi, que la déposition d'un
                        seul témoin oculaire; car une ligne traditionelle ne représente qu'un témoin
                        oculaire; elle ne peut donc équivaloir qu'à un seul témoin.
                    Encyclopédie, vol. 2, p. 854.
                
                Tradition retains the possibility of being authoritative, even for the philosophes, because it may be critically evaluated. 
                The authority of tradition in English in the early modern period is far more
                    questionable because of the influence of the Protestant attack on Catholic
                    tradition. The most frequent collocates of tradition in the English Poetry
                    database between 1550 and 1699 include vain(e), man's, men's, superstition and
                    false. Many citations equate tradition with papism, falsehood, and superstition.
                    In his Voyage Around the World..., Dunton points out
                    that travel is an important corrective given "how fatal into Truth the
                    dependence upon the Tradition and Authority of Men".EEPF: p.
                        290.By contrast to the extensive treatment in the Encyclopédie, the Encyclopedia Britannica, half a century later,
                    fully defines tradition as
                        something handed down from one generation to another without being
                            written. Thus the Jews pretend, that besides their written law contained
                            in the Old Testament, Moses had delivered an oral law which had conveyed
                            down from father to son; and thus the Roman Catholics are said to value
                            particular doctrines supposed to have descended from the apostolic times
                            by tradition.
                        5th edition (1817), vol. 20, pp. 458-9.
                    
                
                Similarly, both Locke and Hume suggest that tradition is an almost completely
                    unreliable form of knowledge. In contrast to the examination in the Encyclopédie, Hume writes
                        An historical fact, while it passes by oral tradition from
                            eyewitnesses and contemporaries, is disguised in every successive
                            narration, and may at last retain but very small, if any, resemblance of
                            the original truth, on which it was founded.
                        BritPhil: David Hume, Natural History,
                            p. 312.
                    
                The English representation of tradition, into the 19th century and even among
                    prominent intellectuals, is shaped by anti-Catholic positions from a much
                    earlier period.
                The French representation of tradition in the 19th century sees the development
                    of social and cultural usages, which also appears to be typical of English
                    usage, an issue to be examined in the full paper. This is suggested both by the
                    frequencies of the use of tradition in particular works and terms most commonly
                    associated with tradition. For example, 127 of 481 occurrences of tradition in
                    the 19th century (CPhil) are found in one work: Ballanche, Pierre-Simon [1818],
                        Essai sur les institutions sociales, with 70
                    occurrences in Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph [1860], De la justice
                        dans la révolution et dans l'église. Examination of collocation
                    tables for French databases, such as ARTFL, suggest that in the 19th century,
                    traditions are localized by geographic region, family, and class, associated
                    with customs, while retaining clear religious connotations. The twentieth
                    century introduces a new strong pattern of associations, featuring national,
                    French, political and revolutionary traditions as the most frequent collocates,
                    which take some precedence over the personal, local and familial patterns of
                    19th century tradition.
                There are also important shifts in the "ownership" of tradition in French. The
                    construct "our tradition[s]" rarely appears in the 17th or 18th centuries, but
                    becomes fairly common in the 19th and 20th centuries. By contrast, the 3rd
                    person possessives (his/her, their) also increase during the period, but not
                    nearly as quickly.The first person plural possessive and all forms
                        of tradition: 1 occurrence in the 17th century, 44 in the 20th. Third person
                        plural possessive and all forms of tradition: 17 occurrences in the 17th
                        century, 84 in the 20th. In the 17th and 18th centuries, other people
                    (Jews for example) had their traditions, but by the 19th and 20th centuries
                    tradition becomes associated with local, national, or cultural
                    identification.
                The use of relatively simple methodologies applied to large textual databases may
                    result in useful contributions to the history of concepts and histoire des mentalités, by facilitating examinations
                    of contrasts between long term developments across languages and the isolation
                    of individual texts or authors that may introduce significant changes in these
                    trends. The examination of tradition, in French and English, reveals evolving
                    patterns in relationship of contemporaries to their past, authority of the past,
                    and the importance of the past in self-definition.
            
        
        
            
                Databases
                The following databases, from various sources, all implemented under PhiloLogic,
                    have been used so far in this study.
                Les dictionnaires d'autrefois and the pre-release
                    implementation of the 4th edition of the DAF.
                Diderot, Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire
                    raisonné....
                Main ARTFL Database [TLF].
                Corpus des oeuvres de philosophie en langue française (Bibliopolis).
                Early English Prose Fiction [EEPF], (Chadwyck-Healey).
                English Poetry [EngPo], (Chadwyck-Healey).
                British Philosophy, 1600-1900 [BritPhil], (Intelex).
                 Corpus de la littérature narrative [BASILE], (Champion).
            
        
    
