


    
        
            
                An hypothesis of formalization of literary data for
                    text analysis: a case study on Karl Kraus' writings
                
                    
                        Daniela
                        Alderuccio
                        
                            ENEA/UDA (Italy)
                            alderuccio@casaccia.enea.it
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    The growing availability on the Web of literary heritage is going to make
                        easier humanistic researches, on the one hand facilitating access to
                        information sources and documents and on the other hand providing a
                        knowledge representation of texts, enabling its sharing and reuse. One of
                        the major problems to face in knowledge representation is the formalization
                        of literary data. The main difficulty is to capture the richness of word
                        meanings into an established form, which allows automatic data treatment,
                        preserving the essence of a thing anyway.
                    This challenge is related to the different nature of Computer Science and of
                        the Humanities. The former has its foundation in establishing a formal
                        representation of what exists (formal languages and modeling of reality);
                        the latter is based on interpretation, whose subjectivity escapes from
                        classification or rules. It is recognized that accuracy in literary analysis
                        is related to cultural background and literary sensibility, but the
                        underlying ambiguity of natural languages poses to researchers further
                        difficulties: a specific term may have different or contradictory meanings
                        and intepretations; authors frequently use different words or expressions to
                        refer to the same meaning
                    By developing common formalisms, Computer Science tools aim at reaching a
                        sharable agreement on world representation. Similarly, in order to give an
                        objective basis to concepts (starting point of the analysis), an application
                        of this formal approach in the literary domain may allow experts to define
                        and share a common vocabulary, to reach an agreement on word senses, thus
                        reducing ambiguity.
                    In the hypothesis proposed in this paper, the use of a reference tool (such
                        as an ontology»An ontology is a specification of a
                            conceptualization (…)That is, an ontology is a description (like a
                            formal specification of a program) of the concepts and relationships
                            that can exist for an agent or a community of agents« in T. Gruber.
                            »What is an ontology?« URL 
                            (T. R. Gruber. A translation approach to portable
                                ontologies. Knowledge Acquisition,
                            5(2):199-220, 1993)) seems to offer a means to face this
                        challenging task with success: by keeping from misunderstanding in reading
                        texts and by limiting subjectivity in their analysis, the first expected
                        result is a better comprehension of literary phenomena; by improving
                        knowledge representation of a literary text, the second effect of
                        formalization is the retrieval of more relevant texts for research
                        purposes.
                
                
                    Application and Results
                    In the analysis of a literary phenomenon, some of the aspects to be
                        considered are:
                            the ambiguity of natural languages, that poses to experts problems
                                in order to limit subjectivity in interpreting texts;
                            and the heterogeneity of information sources to select
                                (historical, cultural, geo-political), that determines the need of
                                retrieving relevant documents for the analysis.
                        
                    Identifying criteria able to deepen the study of a literary phenomenon and to
                        extract interesting documents on that subject, would be of great utility.
                        The adoption of a linguistic resources (namely the ontology of WordNet [11])
                        as reference tool, seems to be a viable idea in order to reach both
                        goals.
                    In order to test this approach in humanistic research, the "Dualism Truth vs.
                        Propaganda" [2] in Karl Kraus has been investigated, using WordNet, the
                        on-line reference system designed at the Cognitive Science Laboratory of the
                        University of Princeton, to model lexical memory. Kraus was an Austrian
                        intellectual and one of the bitterest satirists of fin-de-siècle Vienna, to
                        be compared with Jonathan Swift for his satiric vision and command of
                        language. He was a critic, a playwright, a poet, a journalist and the editor
                        of the magazine "The Torch" - Die Fackel [8]) - for about 36 years. Strongly
                        believing in a language as a medium to express the truth, one of his major
                        concerns was the German language and its misuse by the press. As a
                        journalist he believed in informing the public rather than overwhelming it
                        with propaganda: his main goal was to report facts, instead of interpreting
                        them. Referring to this informative function of journalism, he wrote: "My
                        duty is to say the Truth to Mankind" " Mein Pflicht ist es, den
                            Menschen die Wahrheit zu sagen", Kraus K.: Die Fackel, Band 11, no.
                            852-856 (May 1931), p. 95
                    Basing on Kraus' writings, the literary phenomenon under analysis has been
                        synthesized into four keywords: "Language", "Truth", "Journalism",
                        "Propaganda". The meanings of these selected terms have been defined using
                        WordNet concept disambiguation. Because in this lexical database English
                        nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs are organized into synonym sets called
                        synsets (each representing one underlying lexical concept), disambiguation
                        is based on lexical and semantic relationsLexical relationships:
                            synonimy, antonimy, polisemy. Semantic relationship: hyponymy,
                            hyperonimy. with other concepts.
                    Examination of WordNet definitions has led to: the exploration of keywords
                        meanings; the delimitation of their semantic fields; and the finding of
                        other related couples of opposing concepts such as: Truth vs.
                        Verisimilitude, Language vs. Paralanguage, Journalism vs. Propaganda. The
                        application of this ontology-based approach has been able to improve the
                        comprehension of the "Dualism Truth vs. Propaganda" in Karl Kraus
                        (1874-1936). As main consequence, by using WordNet it has been possible to
                        study the literary phenomenon under analysis, confirming the validity of
                        Kraus' position towards information problems and finding the core of the
                        antagonism between "Propaganda and Truth".
                    As far as the second goal of this research is concerned (that is to find more
                        relevant text for analysis), in order to apply the proposed approach, two
                        sets of Kraus’ aphorisms (Kraus, 1955) - »Writing and Reading« and »By
                        Night«[4] "Writing and Reading" and
                                "By Night" have been extracted from
                            "Dicta and Contradicta" (Sprueche und Widersprueche), a selection of
                            aphorisms appeared in "The Torch" and published in 1909. - have
                        been digitized. Then, by a human indexing operation performed using the
                        ontology contained in WordNet, it has been assigned to each aphorism a
                        category, based on semantic fields. The above selected keywords (»Language«,
                        »Truth«, »Journalism«) have been adopted as indicator of semantic fields.
                        Each aphorism has been labelled by the presence/absence of these fields.
                        Despite the fact that »By Night« has no occurrences of the keyword
                        »Journalism«, human analysis shows that it contains two relevant
                            aphorisms"Wort und Wesen: das ist die
                                einzige Verbindung, die ich je im Leben angestrebt habe"
                            Kraus K. Beim Wort genommen, p. 431; Detti e Contraddetti, p. 352;
                                "Zensur und Zeitung - wie sollte ich nicht
                                zugunsten jener entscheiden? Die Zensur kann die Wahrheit auf eine
                                Zeit unterdruecken, indem sie ihr das Wort nimmt. Die Zeitung
                                unterdrueckt die Wahrheit auf die Dauer, indem sie ihr Worte gibt.
                                Die Zensur schadet weder der Wahrheit noch dem Wort; die Zeitung
                                beiden", Kraus K. Beim Wort genommen, p. 443; Detti e
                            Contraddetti, p. 358 for the comprehension of the »Dualism Truth
                        vs. Propaganda« in Karl Kraus. In »By Night« the keyword »Journalism« is
                        absent, but it is present the word »Zeitung« = newspaper, an implicit form,
                        but semantically related to the keyword »Journalism«. If the goal of the
                        search were to find all sets of aphorisms where Language and Truth and Journalism occur, probably this set of aphorisms
                        would have been ignored, because not pertinent with the query. By defining
                        semantic fields and categorizing aphorisms using them, the proposed approach
                        has made possible to select »By Night« as a relevant document.
                
                
                    Conclusions
                    The achieved results show that literary data formalization based on
                        ontologies is able to improve the accuracy of literary research. By
                        including definitions of basic concepts in the domain (also in a
                        machine-interpretable form), by identifying relations among them and by
                        defining semantic fields, WordNet allows experts to share information in a
                        domain, to provide critical notes and comments on texts, and to interpret
                        them.
                    Furthermore, from this study emerges that defining the semantic field of
                        words (by applying definitions provided by an ontology) and indexing
                        documents by adopting a semantic categorization is an effective way of
                        representing the content of a text: the faculty to bring to light word
                        meanings, hidden in texts in an implicit form, improves the retrieval of
                        more relevant documents, matching humanistic research needs.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                AA.VV.
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            Information processing &amp; Management ─ An
                                International Journal
                            
                                New York
                                Elsevier Science Ltd
                                37
                                2
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                     Alderuccio
                                
                            
                            Dualism Truth vs. Propaganda in Karl Kraus. Methodology
                                for a computer-assisted literary analysis
                        
                        
                            Thesis
                            
                                ENEA/University of Rome »La Sapienza«
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                     Arntzen
                                
                            
                            Karl Kraus und die Presse
                            
                                Muenchen
                                Wilhelm Fink Verlag
                                1975
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    T.
                                    De Mauro
                                
                            
                            Capire le parole
                            
                                Roma-Bari
                                Editore Laterza
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    N.
                                    Guarino
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Poli
                                
                            
                            The role of Ontology in the Information
                                Technology
                        
                        
                            Int’l J. Human-Computer Studies
                            
                                43
                                5/6
                                623-965
                                Nov.-Dec. 1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Gruninger
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Ushold
                                
                            
                            Ontologies: principles, methods and
                                applications
                        
                        
                            Knowledge Engineering Review
                            
                                The University of Edinburgh
                                11
                                2
                                
                                June 1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Kipphof
                                
                            
                            Der Aphorismus im Werke von Karl Kraus
                        
                        
                            Phil. Diss.
                            
                                Muenchen
                                1961
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    K.
                                    Kraus
                                
                            
                            Die Fackel
                            
                                
                                Koesel Verlag
                                1968
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    K.
                                    Kraus
                                
                            
                            Beim Wort genommen
                            
                                Passau
                                Koesel Verlag
                                1955
                            
                        
                        transl. into Italian in Detti e Contraddetti.
                            Adelphi Edizioni, 1999; transl. into English by
                            Jonathan Mc Vity, in Kraus K., Dicta and
                                Contradicta, Univ. of Illinois Press, 2001
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    W.
                                    Mieder
                                
                            
                            Karl Kraus und der sprichwoertliche Aphorismus
                        
                        
                            Muttersprache
                            
                                89
                                
                                97-115
                                1979
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    A.
                                    Miller
                                
                            
                            WordNet: a lexical data base for English
                        
                        
                            Communications of the ACM
                            
                                38
                                11
                                39-41
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                    G.
                                    A.
                                    Miller
                                 et al
                            WordNet: An on-line lexical database
                        
                        
                            International Journal of Lexicography
                            (special issue)
                            
                                3
                                4
                                
                                1990
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                J.
                                F
                                Sowa
                            
                        
                        Knowledge representation: logical, philosophical, and computational foundations
                        
                            Pacific Grove, CA
                            Brooks Cole Publishing Co.
                            2000
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            E.
                                M.Voorhees
                            Natural Language Processing and Information Retrieval
                        
                        
                            Information extraction - Towards scalable adaptable systems
                            
                                Berlin
                                Springer Verlag
                                1999
                            
                        
                
            
        
    
