


    
        
            
                Document management system for supporting historians
                
                    
                        Hiromasa
                        Nakatani
                        
                            Shizuoka University
                            nakatani@cs.inf.shizuoka.ac.jp
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Yukihiro
                        Itoh
                        
                            Shizuoka University
                            itoh@cs.inf.shizuoka.ac.jp
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Computer assistance in historical documents in the format of official
                        documents, memorandums, or personal diaries still has problems to be solved.
                        In this paper, we discuss the point of managing text documents in history,
                        and construct a system that suffices the research style of historians. We
                        investigate research styles of historians in view of their computer use, and
                        present a system for supporting researchers in history. Our system stores
                        historical stories and materials concerning an event called "Eejanaika"
                        (Fig. 1) [1-3]. The eccentric event happened from place to place in central
                        Japan in 1867, triggered by a scattering of protecting charms of shrines.
                        Clouds danced around with the refrain "Eejanaika," that means "who cares?"
                        in Japanese, and some of them escalated into a state of chaos [4].
                    
                        Eejanaika database
                    
                
                
                    Subjects and key points for computer assistance for history
                    By interviewing historians, we investigate the procedure that historians
                        follow for their research, and summarize key subjects in introducing
                        computers to historical research.
                    First key subject is in difficulty in extracting necessary information from
                        historical documents. Even if a historian gathered all the necessary
                        documents, it is difficult to find out necessary parts for his/her
                        particular topic. To solve this problem, we have to tackle the following subjects:
                            1-1 How to organize such information that can distinguish
                                necessary documents from unnecessary ones.
                            1-2 How to make a system function that can retrieve necessary
                                information from large volumes of those documents.
                        
                    Note that historians retrieve the data based on their experiences and their
                        subjective judgments. Here we have two problems:
                            2-1 How to classify the documents based on their subjective
                                judgments.
                            2-2 How to organize the classification function in the
                            system.
                        
                    Second problem is in difficulty in surveying the retrieved data and
                        extracting useful information. When we use conventional media like notebooks
                        or cards to manage collected information, the type of information we can
                        deal with is restricted, and as the volumes become larger it becomes more
                        time-consuming and physically difficult to grasp the whole image. Here are
                        three problems:
                            3-1 What sort of space we should use for arranging all documents.
                            3-2 How to locate each document in the above space.
                            3-3 How to organize the display function to facilitate the
                                observer.
                        
                
                
                    Implementation and data structure
                    We consider those subjects and apply our system to a historical event of
                        Eejanaika to evaluate the effectiveness of our system by verifying the
                        hypothesis given by a historian. Suppose that a historian gets an idea that
                        "Eejanaika is such an extraordinary festival that was triggered by a
                        scattering of protecting charms of shrines and it came to chaos that was
                        inadmissible by the Establishment. At some places, on the other hand, those
                        phenomena were terminated in the acceptable state. Then, it is important to
                        classify those festivals into three types: (A) Festivals that reached chaos,
                        (B) Eccentric but terminated in the acceptable state, and (C) Only extension
                        or extra of regular festivals. It is also necessary to see the distribution
                        of those festivals on the map. I have an intuition that post-towns on main
                        roads fell into a state of chaos, but rural districts held just regular
                        festivals. Maybe that relates to the regional difference as regards degree
                        of distress, power of the Establishment, and strength of people's ego". To
                        verify this hypothesis, the historian has to classify the festivals judging
                        by corresponding documents, make a map of the distribution of the festivals,
                        and grasp the whole image.
                    We investigate the above problems 1-1 through 3-3 in the case of Eejanaika
                        study.
                    1-1 Representation of key terms for retrieving necessary documents: When a
                        historian hits on the above hypothesis, the concept of three types of
                        Eejanaika is formed in their mind. Then related documents are collected for
                        finding out whether there really happened Eejanaika or not. However there
                        are few expressions in the documents that explicitly say, "Eejanaika has
                        occurred." Thus we should make a criterion that can judge whether the
                        document is relating to Eejanaika or not. For example, if Eejanaika occurred
                        in an area, such expressions appear in the official documents as "protecting
                        charms scattered and people held a festival," "Men were disguised in woman's
                        clothes and women in men's," "dancing with nothing on," "rice cakes and
                        moneys were scattered." Thus we make a table of expressions with which the
                        system can determine whether or not the document is relating to the concept
                        that the historian has interest in.
                    
                        Table of expressions
                        
                            Category
                            expressions in documents
                        
                        
                            Scattering
                            scattering, protecting charms
                        
                        
                            Duration
                            # days
                        
                        
                            Yell
                            Eejanaika, Iijanaika
                        
                        
                            Mood
                            excited, high, crazy, mad
                        
                        
                            Degree
                            unheard-of, strange, amazing
                        
                        
                            Clothes
                            disguise, naked, loincloth
                        
                        
                            Things scattered
                            rice, rice cake
                        
                    
                    1-2 Retrieving contents of document: The system retrieves the document by key
                        terms and makes document-characteristic tables that are assigned to a
                        pattern that expresses one of the above categories. An example of a
                        document-characteristic table that the system retrieved from an official
                        document of Arai-Town, vol.8, pp. 884 - 445, is shown in Table 2:
                    
                        Document-characteristic table
                        
                            Theme
                            Eejanaika
                        
                        
                            Category
                            pattern of expression
                        
                        
                            Duration
                            7 days
                        
                        
                            Mood
                            crazy
                        
                        
                            Degree
                            unheard-of
                        
                        
                            Clothes
                            dressed as a man, loincloth
                        
                    
                    2-1 Criterion for classifying the retrieved document: The system classifies
                        and organizes the document of interest. Here the system classifies
                        extraordinary festivals into three types using a tree structure for
                        classification.
                    2-2 Classification method: The system traverses the tree from its root to the
                        leaves and tries matching between each document-characteristic table and a
                        priori given model tables (Fig. 2).
                    
                        Classification tree
                    
                    3-1 Space for surveying the documents: We adopt three-dimensional space with
                        axes of time and location (latitude, longitude) for surveying the historical
                        documents.
                    3-2 Assign the time and location of the document: The system assigns the time
                        and location of the document by finding those expressions that relate to
                        time and location.
                    3-3 Function for displaying the space: The system has a function for showing
                        the distribution of documents in three-dimensional space.
                
                
                    Experiments
                    We show the effectiveness of our system by verifying the hypothesis. We built
                        a document database by extracting articles that describe events in 1867 from
                        official documents of cities and towns in Shizuoka and Aichi prefectures,
                        and the database consists of 50 articles relating to Eejanaika. First, to
                        verify the above hypothesis, Eejanaika documents classified into three types
                        are plotted on the then road maps (Fig. 3). That verifies most escalated
                        festivals range along the route of Tokaido and its connecting routes.
                    
                        Distribution of Eejanaika
                    
                    
                        Distribution of Eejanaika and Sukegou-Soudou riot
                    
                    Next hypothesis given by a historian is that "Eejanaika might be caused by
                        public discontent that had been accumulated among people groaning under
                        tyranny and suffering crop failures. In that sense, Eejanaika was similar
                        phenomenon with 'Sukegou-Soudou' riot that happened almost at the same time
                        in the east of Aichi prefecture. A form of the event in the case of
                        Sukegou-Soudou riot is protest or subversion, while in the case of Eejanaika
                        it is festival."
                    Using our system, we plot the records of Eejanaika with Sukegou-Soudou riot
                        (Fig. 4). In the map, x-marks stand for Sukegou-Soudou riot, and black dots
                        stand for violent ones. This map can extend following knowledge:
                            1. Toyohashi and Kariya districts had most violent riots, and
                                Eejanaika in both districts escalated into a state of chaos. The
                                first Eejanaika happened in Toyohashi.
                            2. Many violent Sukegou-Soudou riots happened in the districts
                                west of Toyokawa river, while that kind of riots scarcely happened
                                in the east. The situations of the oppression and the crop failures
                                were almost the same in both ereas. In the east, Eejanaika, instead
                                of Sukegou-Soudou riots, was triggered by scatterings of protecting
                                charms in the course of extraordinary festivals.
                            3. Eejanaika first happened in rural districts, where
                                Sukegou-Soudou riots happened, then spread over the neighboring
                                towns and all over the nearby districts.
                            4. Though both events were caused by the same mental state of the
                                public, Sukegou-Soudou riots mainly happened in rural districts
                                while Eejanaika in urban districts.
                        
                    Although historians have already pointed out the knowledge 1 to 4 without
                        using our system, they appreciate the functions of the system that make
                        their verifications clear and objective. Future work will be applications of
                        the system to other fields of history or the humanities.
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H,
                                    Nakatani
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Y.
                                    Itoh
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    K.
                                    Abe
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Tamura
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Akaishi
                                
                            
                            Computer De Eejanaika
                            (in Japanese)
                        
                        
                            Humanities and Information Processing
                            
                                Tokyo
                                Bensei-Shuppan
                                19
                                
                                16-23
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Y.
                                    Itoh
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    T.
                                    Konishi
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    T.
                                    Miura
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Akatsuka
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Tamura
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    K.
                                    Abe
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Akaishi
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Nakatani
                                
                            
                            Extraction and classification of historical documents
                                and overlook of classification results for historical research
                                supports
                            (in Japanese)
                        
                        
                            Trans. of Information Processing Society of Japan
                            
                                40
                                3
                                821-830
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Akaishi
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Y.
                                    Okada
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Nakatani
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Y.
                                    Itoh
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Tamura
                                
                            
                            The historical data management and visualization system
                                for historical research supports
                            (in Japanese)
                        
                        
                            Trans. of Information Processing Society of Japan
                            
                                40
                                3
                                831-839
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Sadao
                                    Tamura
                                
                            
                            Eejanaika Hajimaru
                            (in Japanese)
                            
                                Tokyo
                                Aoki-Shoten
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
