


    
        
            
                'DNA' and Non-traditional Authorship Attribution: An
                    Inclusive Model
                
                    
                        Joseph
                        Rudman
                        
                            Carnegie Mellon University
                            jr20@andrew.cmu.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                        
                             Anything a person writes contains the code of his intellectual
                                DNA, or whatever you want to call it.
                            Webb 1994
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            The greater the number of features and the more the features
                                belong to different categories (e.g., syntactic structures, type of
                                grammatical subject, inflexions, vocabulary, spelling, and so on)
                                the stronger the case for shared authorship. 
                            Eagleson 1989
                        
                    
                
                
                    INTRODUCTION:
                    For many years it has been obvious from the literature that most
                        non-traditional authorship attribution studies using one or some other small
                        number of style markers do not carry the weight of scientific validity with
                        either the majority of other authorship attribution practitioners, the
                        specialists in the field of the study, or the general public. (In addition
                        to Eagleson, see Banks and Rudman -- also, Rudman 1998)
                    During a talk on the "Style-Marker Mapping Project" at the ALLC-ACH 2000
                        conference in Glasgow, I mentioned, in passing, an attribution model based
                        on a "DNA" concept. (Rudman 2000) It was illustrative and not "on topic."
                        However, the audience picked up on this and some of the ensuing questioning
                        and discussion kept trying to move away from the Style-marker Mapping
                        Project.
                    This paper presents a non-traditional authorship attribution model based on a
                        "DNA" analogy. This paper emphasizes that it is only an analogy -- a
                        framework to explain the techniques of the "Inclusive Model" -- there are
                        obvious fundamental differences between DNA and style.
                    Because some of the terms in this paper could be unfamiliar to the expected
                        audience, a clear and concise definition is given the first time each such
                        term is used.
                
                
                    I. BACKGROUND AND DEFINITIONS
                    If we look at style as a living organism, style-markers are its genetic
                        material -- making the Style-Marker Mapping Project (Rudman, 2000) analogous
                        to the human genome project. I would like to extend this biology analogy:
                        The Inclusive Authorship Attribution Model being analogous to the DNA
                        analysis.
                    The earliest reference to DNA and style that I have seen is Bailey's
                        comparison of the tools used to decode the underlying makeup of the two --
                        X-ray diffraction for DNA, the computer for style. Bailey does not move
                        towards a DNA model for stylistics. (Bailey)
                    The lead quote by Webb also is quoted in Forsyth's dissertation. Yet Forsyth
                        does not use the intent of the quote to move into a DNA model. (Forsyth)
                    I have been leaning towards a more inclusive attribution model that would
                        utilize a large number of style-markers since the mid 1980's. Other
                        researchers also have recognized the need to expand the number of style
                        markers in attribution studies. As the DNA structure became decoded and the
                        comparison methods refined, it became the analogous model of choice. I first
                        mentioned the model at the ALLC-ACH Oxford conference in 1992. (Banks and
                        Rudman) The thrust of that presentation was towards a statistical method of
                        combining the results of different statistical results on various
                        style-markers. This section briefly traces the evolution of the DNA model
                        through various publications and presentations.
                    Clear and concise definitions of the DNA autoradiogram are given. (Kirby) A
                        brief explanation of why this model is necessary closes this section.
                        (Willing)
                
                
                    II. THE MODEL
                    
                        Outline a method of analysis which will allow organization of these
                            features [the entire range of linguistic features] so as to facilitate
                            comparison of any one use of language with any other
                        (Carter, Crystal and Davy, and Darbyshire). McMenamin 1993
                    
                    
                        A) How the Inclusive Model differs from other models (e.g.
                            multivariate models and Burrows' Delta Project). (Holmes, Burrows) 
                         B) The DNA Analogy is Explicated.It is shown how each locus of
                            the autoradiogram is equivalent to a different style-marker. The
                            determination of each style-marker locus is discussed.Forsyth's
                            suggestion at the Glasgow conference that a list of "proven"
                            style-markers should be provided and used is discussed.
                        C) Visual RepresentationA Method of visual representation of the
                            results of the model is shown.
                        D) The following two statistical methods of combining each
                            style-marker locus into a final answer are presented and discussed:
                                (1) If the style-markers that are used can be shown to be
                                    independent of one another (e.g. word length distribution,
                                    percentage of nouns starting sentences, type/token ratio) a
                                    procedure based on Fisher's method for combining significance
                                    probabilities from independent statistical tests can be used.
                                    (Fisher)
                                (2) If the style-markers that are used are not independent of
                                    each other (e.g. word length distribution, word length
                                    correlation, percentage of latinate words) the statistical
                                    method employed by DNA researchers can be used.
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    CONCLUSION
                    The method of determining the DNA loci and style-marker loci are different. A
                        single technique is employed to determine all of the DNI loci. Each
                        style-marker locus is determined, for the most part, by different
                        experimental techniques. And some of the style-marker loci are actually the
                        result of multivariate statistical analysis.
                    The Inclusive Authorship Attribution Model promises a degree of acceptability
                        not seen in most non-traditional attribution studies -- especially in types
                        of studies such as McMenamin's, "`Population Model' where there are no
                        obvious authorship candidates, and texts from an entire population of
                        possible authors are considered against texts by one suspected author."
                        (McMenamin)
                
            
        
        
            
                Preliminary Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Richard
                                    W.
                                    Bailey
                                
                            
                            The Future of Computational Stylistics
                        
                        
                            ALLC Bulletin
                            
                                7
                                
                                4-11
                                1979
                            
                        
                        [First presented at the Association for Literary and Linguistic
                            Computing Fifth International Meeting, Friday, December 15, 1978, King's
                            College, University of London. Also in LITERARY
                                COMPUTING AND LITERARY CRITICISM. Ed. Rosanne G. Potter.
                            Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989, 3-12.]
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    J.
                                    Balding
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Peter
                                    Donnelly
                                
                            
                            Inference in Forensic Identification
                        
                        
                            JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY A
                            
                                158
                                [Part 1.]
                                21-53
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    L.
                                    Banks
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Joseph
                                    Rudman
                                
                            
                            Questionable Attribution in the Canon of Daniel Defoe:
                                A Study of Techniques
                        
                        
                            ALLC-ACH'92 Conference. Oxford University, April 7,
                                1992
                            
                                
                                
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    John
                                    Burrows
                                
                            
                            Questions of Authorship: Attribution and Beyond. A
                                Lecture Delivered on the Occasion of the Roberto Busa Award
                        
                        
                            ACH-ALLC01 Conference. New York University, New York,
                                June 14, 2001
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Robert
                                    D.
                                    Eagleson
                                
                            
                            Linguist for the Prosecution
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Geraldine
                                    Barnes
                                 et al 
                            WORDS AND WORDSMITHS
                            
                                Sydney
                                The University of Sydney Press
                                1989
                                22-31
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    A.
                                    Fisher
                                
                            
                            STATISTICAL METHODS FOR RESEARCH WORKERS
                            
                                London
                                Hafner
                                1969
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Richard
                                    S.
                                    Forsyth
                                
                            
                            Stylistic Structures: A Computational Approach to Text
                                Classification
                        
                        
                            Dissertation
                            
                                University of Nottingham
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    I.
                                    Holmes
                                
                            
                            Authorship Attribution and the Book of Morman: A Case
                                Study in Stylometric Techniques
                        
                        
                            Ph.D Thesis
                            
                                University of London, Kings College
                                May 1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    I.
                                    Holmes
                                
                            
                            Vocabulary Richness and the Prophetic Voice
                        
                        
                            (A supplement to the main thesis.) Ph.D Thesis
                            
                                University of London, Kings College
                                November 1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Lorne
                                    T.
                                    Kirby
                                
                            
                            DNA FINGERPRINTING: AN INTRODUCTION
                            
                                New York
                                W. H. Freeman
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Gerald
                                    R.
                                    McMenamin
                                
                            
                            FORENSIC STYLISTICS
                            
                                Amsterdam
                                Elsevier
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Joseph
                                    Rudman
                                
                            
                            The Style-marker Mapping Project: A Rational and
                                Progress Report
                        
                        
                            ALLC/ACH 2000 Conference, University of Glasgow,
                                Scotland, July 25, 2000
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Joseph
                                    Rudman
                                
                            
                            The State of Authorship Attribution Studies: Some
                                Problems and Solutions
                        
                        
                            COMPUTERS AND THE HUMANITIES
                            
                                31
                                4
                                351-365
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Charles
                                    Webb
                                
                            
                            Interview in
                        
                        
                            THE INDEPENDENT MAGAZINE
                            
                                
                                
                                35
                                5 February 1994
                            
                        
                        [Quoted by Forsyth, 8.]
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Richard
                                    Willing
                                
                            
                            Mismatch Calls DNA Tests Into Question
                        
                        
                            USA TODAY
                            
                                
                                
                                3A
                                8 February 2000
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
