


    
        
            
                Facilitating Text Analysis in Russian Culture: TEI or
                    Topic Maps?
                
                    
                        Miranda
                        Remnek
                        
                            University of Minnesota
                            m-remn@tc.umn.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Still under development, the University of Minnesota's Early 19th Century Russian
                    Readership &amp; Culture Project () is one of relatively few
                    comprehensive digital archives for the study of Imperial Russian history. Based
                    on materials gathered over two decades of research that culminated in a
                    dissertation on The Expansion of Russian Reading Audiences,
                        1828-1848, the project is distinctive in a number of ways. First, it
                    pulls together a variety of primary research materials into a single archive.
                    (To some extent this is not uncommon, but the ENCRRC archive includes not only
                    texts, images, and scholarly reference materials, but also a large statistical
                    database of 12,000 subscription records which provide much additional research
                    data). Second, the search mechanism has been customized to provide simultaneous
                    access to both English and Cyrillic TEI-encoded texts without the need for a
                    Cyrillic keyboard--and this in itself is a technical feat.
                But the project's most distinctive feature is its use of SGML
                    &lt;interp&gt; tags to enrich the texts by encapsulating a number of
                    pre-selected analytical categories. This means that users of the archive are
                    given not one but two modes of access to the content of the four main text
                    groups (fiction, journals, memoirs and travel accounts). How is this achieved?
                    First, researchers are presented with a comprehensive full-text search option,
                    since the project uses Enigma Corporation's powerful SGML-based DynaWeb software
                    to deliver the texts to the web (). Second, the project's adoption of SGML-based analytical tagging means that
                    users have an additional avenue of access to thematic categories. To enable this
                    approach the interface presents a roster of 10 main categories of analysis, each
                    divided into small groups of differing sizes for a total of 60 subcategories.
                    Entries are scripted so that the software can retrieve and display passages that
                    contain superimposed SGML ID references even though the texts are converted to
                    HTML for delivery over the web. Space limitations prevent enumeration of all the
                    subcategories, but a listing of the main themes will give some idea of the
                    research potential involved: Publishing, Print Categories, Novels, Journals,
                    Newspapers, Booktrade, Text Access (Bookstores, Coffeehouses, etc), Reading
                    Publics, Social Groups, and Job Titles.
                The provision of these categories works well for researchers in differing fields
                    of Russian culture. A literary scholar may use the archive to trace references
                    in the various groups of texts to the distribution of original Russian novels
                    versus translations of foreign compositions; he or she may then enhance these
                    findings by searching the database of subscription records from the period
                    1825-1846, and reviewing biographic and geographic data about the subscribers
                    connected with both native and translated novels. A history scholar, on the
                    other hand, may use the materials to trace levels of access to print materials
                    among less privileged groups (such as lower-level bueaucrats and merchants) not
                    normally considered part of the contemporary cultural milieu. A women's studies
                    scholar may use the archive to piece together hard-to-find references to women's
                    reading, and the mechanisms women used to gain access to texts in a clearly
                    defined patriarchal society. It should therefore be clear that employment of a
                    relatively simple SGML-based analysis option has enabled substantial enrichment
                    of a carefully-selected core of texts such that they are immediately serviceable
                    for multiple purposes.
                In addition to the project's value for different fields of study, another
                    important benefit resides, as noted, in its presentation of a rich variety of
                    sources that include encoded images and historical records as well as primary
                    texts. All these resources are related, moreover, by topic. But the linkage
                    between them is not always straightforward, and so it has seemed important to
                    take note of new concepts like SGML Topic Maps (ISO standard 13250, Geneva,
                    December 2000)--which promises to facilitate the linkage of similar elements in
                    different types of research data. As Christian Wittern has suggested ("TEI and
                    Topic Maps," ACH/ALLC 2001), topic maps provide an
                    "architecture for the semantic structuring of information networks…[that] has
                    the potential to provide a bridge between… texts encoded with schemes like the
                    TEI [and] other information resources." More explicitly, Bill Trippe noted
                    recently in an article published in EContent (August
                    2001, v. 24, issue 6, p. 45ff), "For proponents, topic maps are the ideal
                    solution for helping users find information about a topic across a variety of
                    documents."
                Wittern also suggests that topic maps enable an archive to present abstract as
                    well as concrete representations of knowledge. Until recently the categories
                    used in the ENCRRC archive were more exclusively objective than the mix of
                    categories used in our better-known sister project, Women's
                        Travel Writing, 1830-1930 (), and as such, have been
                    easier to apply. But WTW's two subjective categories--gender and ethnicity--are
                    strongly championed by faculty advisers to the project as essential material for
                    the pursuit of current scholarly trends in women's studies (though certainly
                    more challenging to the encoder). It thus seemed advisable to problematize more
                    fully the analytical tools supplied for the ENCRRC archive.
                With this in mind, we are redesigning and testing out certain revamped portions
                    of the ENCRRC archive. Drawing on the work of Hans Holger Rath and Steve Pepper
                    (including their "Navigating Haystacks, Discovering Needles," Markup Languages,
                    1999), we hope to achieve a partial implementation of the topic map standard. We
                    are partially motivated by the hope that this will facilitate an overlay of more
                    provocative, abstract linkages superimposed on our current, largely objective
                    interpretive network. A second goal is to determine whether the presentation of
                    disparate early 19th century Russian history materials in the form of topic maps
                    will make their analysis more convenient and productive for the researcher than
                    their current presentation in separate, though proximate, data groups. But as
                    noted by Trippe, "the proposed standard itself is relatively new… and the
                    commercial technology supporting the standard is still in its early stages." Our
                    second goal is therefore our major concern: to explore how well this concept
                    works in a multi-type archive.
            
        
    
