


    
        
            
                Query Visualization, Markup, and a Region-based
                    Document Model
                
                    
                        Thomas
                        Horton
                        
                            University of Virginia
                            horton@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Sunish
                        Parikh
                        
                            Florida Atlantic University
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Robert
                        Nash
                        
                            Florida Atlantic University
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Abhijit
                        Pandya
                        
                            Florida Atlantic University
                            abhi@cse.fau.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                This paper will address our work in the area of software models and architectures
                    for supporting the development of software tools for text corpora and digital
                    libraries. Previously we have presented a region-based approach for defining and
                    manipulating things found inside text documents [6]. We believe that combining a
                    region-based approach with a markup-centered approach that supports XML and SGML
                    has many benefits. For example, our approach allows software tools to manipulate
                    text features that are not marked-up and features that are non-hierarchical in
                    nature (including arbitrary user selections of parts of a document). Both
                    approaches can be integrated into one tool; for example, a prototype in Java has
                    been developed in earlier work [4] that can manipulate an XML document using a
                    DOM (Document Object Model) implementation while also supporting the
                    region-based operations that we propose.
                In our paper we will specifically address one benefit of our approach: a general
                    method for the visualization of query results. Before presenting this method, we
                    must first provide the terminology used to define it.
                Our region-based approach is largely inspired by sgrep, a free utility for
                    searching structured text documents. It takes a query from a user and returns
                    sections of a text file that match the query. Both its query language and the
                    results it finds are based on an algebra of *regions* and *region sets*:
                        A *region* is a chunk of text, determined by a starting and ending
                            byte position in the text file.
                        A *region set* is collection of regions that can be manipulated in
                            powerful and well-defined ways. For example, two sets can be
                            concatenated, or merged to produce all regions in the first set that are
                            contained with some region in the second region set.
                    
                A simple query in sgrep might be to find a single string in a file; this returns
                    a set of regions, each of which is the pair of starting and ending byte offsets
                    in the file where that string occurred.
                Using regions in text processing is not a new concept. sgrep's notion of regions
                    is identical to the concept of a *span* defined in the TIPSTER architecture [3]
                    for information retrieval software and implemented by systems such as GATE [1].
                    The use of byte-offsets in some way to identify index terms has also been used
                    in earlier systems. For example, in a PAT tree [2] tokens to be indexed are
                    defined using semi-infinite strings (sistrings) that begin at one byte position.
                    This data model supports efficient retrieval in this manner. But our approach
                    differs from this because our reason for using regions is not to achieve
                    efficient retrieval but to support the notion of "nesting" of text features.
                    This supports interesting manipulating of these features to achieve end-user
                    goals beyond efficient retrieval. We have also developed an important
                    enhancement to this approach for XML documents by which regions and nesting are
                    defined based on the markup hierarchy without relying on byte positions.
                A region set is general enough that it can be used to represent many different
                    things in a text:
                        all words in the document;
                        all occurrences of a given token;
                        all DIV1 elements in an XML document;
                        all XML elements that have an attribute with a given value.
                    
                Region sets can also represent a subtext or "selection" made from a document. A
                    region set could represent some selection of XML elements or arbitrary byte
                    positions that that overlap the markup hierarchy.
                We will use the term *text object* (TO) to mean any "thing" that a user wants to
                    define and manipulate in a text document. A *text object occurrence* (TOO) is
                    one occurrence of one of these. A TOO is simply represented by a region (If a
                    TOO is non-contiguous, then it would be represented by a region set. Also, if a
                    document is composed of more than one file, our definition of a region must be
                    adapted. Both of these issues add a level of complexity that we will ignore for
                    the sake of this abstract.) Thus "words" and markup-elements are both text
                    objects in our model, with occurrences of each one represented by a region set.
                As users of sgrep understand well, many useful queries can be defined in terms of
                    the nesting or inclusion of two region sets. It becomes simple enough to find or
                    count occurrences of a particular word (or set of words) in a "context" such as
                    any markup-element unit (e.g. words, lines, paragraphs) if both word-tokens and
                    markup are stored as region sets. And since we have a common model where all of
                    there are represented as text objects, it is just as simple to find or count
                    occurrences of one markup-element inside another, or inside a user-defined
                    selection. This is why we argue that a region-based approach as described here
                    enhances a markup-centered view of documents in software that processes text.
                Our paper will demonstrate this by focusing on how queries to find occurrences of
                    text objects (e.g. words, markup elements) can be visualized. Our approach is a
                    modified version of the TileBars technique [5]. In our approach, a user would
                    define one or more query terms; each might be one or more text objects. In
                    addition, the user would choose a search context to indicate the segments or
                    units in which the software should find occurrences of each of the query terms.
                    Results of such a query can be shown graphically; for example, this URL shows
                    TileBars resulting from a query on a small set of documents (from the original
                    paper on this technique):
                    
                In this output, a document is represented by a rectangle. Each of these has a
                    "row" for each query term, and the "columns" represent the segments that the
                    document is divided into. A shading of grey in each row-column intersection
                    indicates how often each query term occurs in that segement.
                This visualization technique displays the results of queries in terms of several
                    dimensions: documents, terms, and segments. Various attributes of the query
                    results can easily be seen. First, the size of each document (in terms of
                    segments) is shown by the size of the tile. Second, occurrence of terms by
                    segment is indicated when a cell is grey, revealing the relative location within
                    a document where the terms occur. Third, strength of occurrence of each term is
                    indicated by the shade of grey. Finally, cooccurrence of multiple terms is
                    indicated by looking for columns where both rows are shaded.
                Our modifications to the original TileBar method are as follows. First, our query
                    terms are not limited to simply word types. Any text object or combination of
                    text objects can be used. These could include of course markup-elements. Second,
                    the context that defines the segments in each document can be completely
                    controlled by the user, as long as a region-set is selected. The context could
                    be quickly and easily changed to allow a user to see results by, say, act, scene
                    or line in a play. Each of these improvements is directly supported by our
                    region-based model for documents and their contents.
                In conclusion, we believe region-based approach can be combined with a
                    markup-based view of documents to produce software architectures that can meet a
                    variety of user needs. For example, our approach provides a common model for
                    representing words and markup that can more flexibly support the needs of users
                    of digital text resources. This common model shows its advantages in developing
                    a useful and generalized visualization scheme based on the TileBars
                approach.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Rob
                                    Gaizauskas
                                 et al 
                            GATE User Guide
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        Available at: 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Gaston
                                    H.
                                    Gonnet
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Ricardo
                                    A.
                                    Baeza-Yates
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Tim
                                    Snider
                                
                            
                            New Indices for Text: PAT Trees and PAT Arrays
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    William
                                    B.
                                    Frakes
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Ricardo
                                    Baeza-Yates
                                
                            
                            Information Retrieval: Data Structures and Algorithms
                            
                                
                                Prentice Hall PTR
                                1992
                                66-82
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ralph
                                    Grisham
                                 et al 
                            TIPSTER Text Phase II Architecture Design Version 2.3 9
                            
                                
                                New York University
                                September 1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Olya
                                    Gurevich
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    B.
                                    Horton
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Robert
                                    Bingler
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Worthy
                                    N.
                                    Martin
                                
                            
                            A Workbook for Humanities Scholars 
                        
                        
                            Submitted for presentation at ALLC/ACH 2000, Glasgow,
                                21-25 July 2000
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Marti
                                    A.
                                    Hearst
                                
                            
                            TileBars: Visualization of Term Distribution
                                Information in Full Text Information Access
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of CHI'95, Conference on Human Factors and
                                Computing Systems. Assoc. for Computing Machinery 
                            
                                
                                
                                1995
                            
                        
                        Available at:
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    B.
                                    Horton
                                
                            
                            A Region-based Approach for Processing Digital Text
                                Resources
                        
                        
                            Conference Abstracts of the Digital Resources for the
                                Humanities, September 12-15, 1999, King's College, London
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                                47-49
                            
                        
                        Presentation slides available at:
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jani
                                    Jaakkola
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Pekka
                                    Kilpeläinen
                                
                            
                            SGREP (structured grep)
                            
                                
                                University of Helsinki, Finland
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
