


    
        
            
                The name of the place : towards a model for
                    interconnection of geographical entities
                
                    
                        Øyvind
                        Eide
                        The Museum Project, 
                            University of Oslo
                            oyvind.eide@muspro.uio.no
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Lars-Jørgen
                        Tvedt
                        The Documentation Project, 
                            University of Oslo
                            l.j.tvedt@muspro.uio.no
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jon
                        Holmen
                        The Museum Project, 
                            University of Oslo
                            jon.holmen@muspro.uio.no
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    The Documentation Project and the Museum Project are cooperative projects
                        between the four universities in Norway. Since 1991, these projects have
                        performed retro-conversion and digitization of analogue archives, books,
                        images and other media types. During the building up of our diverse
                        collections, the need for a model expressing relationships between place
                        names has been strongly felt, both in the modelling and the presentation of
                        each collection and in the present work towards deeper integration between
                        the various collections.
                    In our paper, we will present an object-oriented model for expressing
                        relations between geographical objects applied on Norwegian geographical
                        information taken from our digital collections, followed by a discussion
                        about further development and implementation of the model.
                
                
                    Previous efforts
                    In connection with geographical reference systems for digital libraries we
                        commonly find the use of UTM coordinates in the specification of
                        geographical entities, as seen e.g. in the Alexandria project (Beard 1997).
                        Whereas this method gives many possibilities both for use in single
                        collections and in the interconnection of heterogeneous collections of
                        information object, this method is not suitable for collections that
                        contains a large number of references to geographical entities for which it
                        is impossible or unfeasible to enter this type of coordinates.
                    Whereas the use of UTM coordinates will be an important part of our system,
                        we have to design a system which does not depend on this type of
                        information. As the basic structure in the organization of the geographical
                        information objects, we use the political geography of Norway. At any single
                        point in history, this structure takes the form of a tree, as seen in fig.
                        1. However, this tree structured model is too restricted to cover
                        collections spanning a time period. It have to be expanded, as we will see
                        below.
                    
                    Vegard Elvestrand has published a standard for geographical classification
                        (Elvestrand 1977) with municipalities as the smallest unit. The number of
                        municipalities in Norway has changed a great deal through splits and
                        unifications. His model is effective for the classification of literature;
                        one of our collections is classified according to his standard (Eide, 1998
                        p. 287-288), but the underlying model is also too restricted for our use.
                        His model contains classification symbols for every municipality that has
                        existed, but it has no linking showing the actual changes.
                    Norsk samfunnsvitenskapelig datatjeneste
                        (Norwegian Social Science Data Services, NSD) has designed various databases
                        based on the administrative structure of Norway, directed towards the needs
                        of the social sciences to present data on present and historical statistics
                        (NSD 1997, chapter 3). Their model is effective for historical models of
                        municipalities, but it does not allow us to include the multiple systems of
                        geographical information needed for cultural and natural historical
                        information systems, as we will see below.
                    The model described here is conform with the CIDOC object-oriented Conceptual
                        Reference Model (CIDOC 1999), and we will follow the further development of
                        the CIDOC model closely as we develop and implement our model of
                        geographical information.
                
                
                    Places vs. place names
                    There are several other structures interconnected with the simple structure
                        of fig. 1, e.g.:
                            Other administrative regions, e.g. police districts, clerical
                                districts
                            Named geographical formations, e.g. lakes, mountains,
                                rivers
                            Property structures, e.g. farms, common land
                        
                    In the geographical model in fig. 1, there is no distinction between a place
                        and a place name. The difference between a geographical unity in the real
                        world and the name we use to refer to this unity must be expressed in any
                        geographical model. There are two main reasons for this:
                            The same word often refer to several distinct places. One example
                                of this is a municipality called Våler, which is found in the county
                                of Hedmark as well as in the county of Østfold.
                            Political structures may change. The area of the town of Hamar is
                                larger today than it was ten years ago, whereas the municipality of
                                Vang no longer exists (in a bureaucratic sense of the word exist),
                                as it is included in the expanded town of Hamar.
                        
                    In fig. 2, our basic geographic model is
                        sketched, populated with several geographical objects. The idea behind the
                        model is not to represent all potential information about geographical
                        entities and their relations, but to include enough information to perform
                        computer search, browse and interconnection between objects in an effective
                        way.
                    
                    Each object in our model may have an attribute showing the time span that the
                        geographical entity was known in that form. This does not mean that the
                        object is placed in a time continuum, as it has a distinct, everlasting
                        geographical location, which may be expressed in geographical coordinates.
                        The time span is just an attribute showing which time period this specific
                        geographical object was referred to. This is especially important for legal
                        entities such as municipalities. Municipalities described as old or new in the
                        figure have been split up or united.
                    The direction of the graph is always from the bigger unit to the smaller
                        unit: a unit pointed to is a part of the unit pointing from. To make this
                        possible, we have split geographical entities covering parts of several
                        other entities into parts shown on the figure as hp for hill parts and sp for sea
                        parts. Each such part is part of both the sea as a whole and the
                        municipality that this part is located in.
                    The known place object contains a name, an optional time span, and references
                        to other objects forming the graph. As some of our collections contain UTM
                        data, and as we will be able to import such data for all our municipalities
                        from e.g. NSD, the object also contains an optional UTM attribute.
                
                
                    Expansion into the unknown
                    We define each actual mentioning of names in texts and other media as an
                        observation. In this context, observations are all references to
                        geographical entities in information objects. Their relation to the model is
                        seen in fig. 3. These observations are external
                        to the model; whereas the model shows the objective reality (in the meaning
                        agreed upon, checked), observations are subjective references made by a
                        human being at a specific time, although this time may be uncertain or
                        unknown.
                    
                    An observation will never refer to more than one place-name by definition. If
                        there is more than one link from an observation to known facts, such a split
                        expresses an insecure fact, in which case an observation may relate to one
                        out of several possible known places, but we do not know which one.
                    There is no limitations as to what kind of entities may be included in an
                        implementation of this model, but we will have to decide on standards when
                        we use the model in actual work. The development of such standards will be
                        be discussed in our paper, together with search facilities and matters of
                        implementation.
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    K.
                                    Beard
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    T.
                                    Smith
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    L.
                                    Hill
                                
                            
                            Meta-information models for georeferenced digital
                                library collections
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the Second IEEE Metadata Conference,
                                September 16-17, 1997
                            
                                
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Nick
                                    Crofts
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Ifigenia
                                    Dionissiadou
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Martin
                                    Doerr
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Matthew
                                    Stiff
                                
                            
                            Definition of the CIDOC object-oriented Conceptual
                                Reference Model
                            
                                
                                Produced by the ICOM/CIDOC Documentation Standards
                                    Group
                                1999
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Vegard
                                    Elvestrand
                                
                            
                            Klassifikasjonsnøkkel til norsk topografi
                                [Classification key to Norwegian topography]
                            
                                Trondheim
                                
                                1976
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Øyvind
                                    Eide
                                
                            
                            The Quest for Re-Intergration : Creating New Documents
                                across Traditional Borders
                        
                        
                            Proceeding of 6th International BOBCATSSS Symposium,
                                January 1998
                            
                                Budapest
                                
                                1998
                                280-291
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            NDS: Katalog 1997. Data og servicetilbud [Catalog 1997.
                                Data and products]
                            
                                
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
