


    
        
            
                System for Automatic Building of a Representative
                    Corpus Using Internet
                
                    
                        Grigori
                        Sidorov
                        
                            Center for Computing Research, National Polytechnic Institute, Mexico
                                sidorov@cic.ipn.mx
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Alexander
                        Gelbukh
                        
                            Center for Computing Research, National Polytechnic Institute, Mexico
                                elbukh@cic.ipn.mx
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Liliana
                        Chanona-Hernandez
                        
                            Center for Computing Research, National Polytechnic Institute, Mexico
                                lchanona@mail.com
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    The problem of using Internet as a linguistic resource is very practical.
                        Internet has a vast number of documents, so there is a possibility to
                        extract many useful linguistic facts without much additional effort and
                        cost.
                    Usually, the Internet resources are viewed as something that should be
                        searched every time the data is needed, see, for example, the concept of
                        virtual corpus (Kilgariff, 2001). We suggest using Internet as a source of
                        linguistic data that is searched only once and the results of searches are
                        saved in a local computer without the necessity to repeat the whole process.
                        Still, the resulting texts neither can be a collection of all available
                        texts because of its size, nor the texts can be randomly chosen from
                        Internet because this does not guarantee the correct representation of
                        different text types, or words, or morphemes, etc.
                    Thus, it is necessary to develop criteria of a representative corpus, at
                        least, in some sense, i.e., to represent certain language features. In our
                        opinion, one of the possible criteria of a representative corpus is the
                        proportional representation of all wordforms that exist in the language.
                        Such a corpus is representative from the morphological or lexical points of
                        view, though it represents neither all varieties of syntactic structures,
                        nor, for example, different types of texts (like texts of different styles
                        or genres).
                    It is obvious that this criterion is good for typical Indo-European languages
                        though it may be not appropriate for languages of different types. For
                        example, in the agglutinative languages, where the words are composed of a
                        great number of morphemes, it is necessary to represent morphemes rather
                        than wordforms. The same happens with the polysynthetic languages. So, the
                        application of this criterion is limited to the languages with certain
                        morphological structure.
                    Further in the paper we first describe the basic steps of the system that is
                        used for compilation of the corpus and then describe its application to the
                        Spanish language.
                
                
                    System's functioning
                    We adopted the point of view that the corpus is considered representative (in
                        our case, in morphological or lexical sense) if it has contexts for all
                        wordforms that exist in the language in some proportion (we are speaking
                        about wordforms derived from the words that are contained in usual
                        dictionaries). There are several possible ways to calculate the proportions,
                        thus, there are different strategies of context searches during corpus
                            compilation:
                            To search equal number of contexts for each wordform.
                            To search equal number of contexts for each lemma. This means that
                                if lemmas that belong to different parts of speech have different
                                number of wordforms, then some wordforms will have much less
                                contexts than the others. It is possible to equalize the number of
                                contexts for wordforms taking into account parts of speech, but then
                                this strategy will be the same as the previous one.
                            To search wordforms in the proportion that corresponds to their
                                frequencies in texts. Maybe, it is necessary to take into account
                                parts of speech because words of different parts of speech have
                                different number of wordforms.
                        
                    We have chosen the last approach, for the time being ignoring parts of
                        speech. For Internet searches we used AltaVista search engine.
                    The system makes the following basic steps.
                            To obtain the initial list of words from an existing dictionary
                                (the head words are taken) or from a corpus. If it is necessary, the
                                words are normalized.
                            To generate all wordforms for each lemma.
                            To get from Internet the number of documents, containing each
                                wordform (AltaVista search).
                            To calculate the number of contexts for each wordform given a
                                fixed number of contexts for lemmas.
                            To get from Internet the URLs of the documents containing each
                                wordform (using AltaVista).
                            To load the documents using the found URLs.
                            To get the context for wordforms applying the criterion of the
                                "acceptable" contexts (the context has enough words, the words in
                                the different contexts are not repeated). The context size and the
                                criterion of the context acceptability are parameters of the
                            system.
                        
                    This system permits to calculate the number of contexts for each wordform
                        according to their frequencies in Internet and to obtain the real-world
                        contexts.
                
                
                    Application to Spanish
                    We developed software that implements the system described above. This
                        software was applied to the Spanish language.
                    First, we obtained a wordlist from the Spanish explanatory dictionary by
                        Anaya group. The dictionary has about 30,000 headwords. Since the words are
                        in their dictionary forms, no normalization was necessary. For each lemma,
                        the list of its grammatical forms was generated. We used the system of
                        morphological generation/analysis developed in our laboratory.
                    At the next step, for each wordform the program made query to AltaVista and
                        analyzed the results. First, it got a number of documents and calculated the
                        number of contexts that should be obtained. We used the value of 50 contexts
                        per lemma. Note that it was considered impossible for a wordform to have a
                        frequency "0", if this value was obtained then the frequency "1" was
                        assigned by force. For example, this situation happened for verbs that have
                        a lot of grammatical forms in Spanish.
                    After this, the program obtained the URLs of the documents that contain the
                        wordform.
                    Then the system loaded the documents using their URLs and analyzed them in
                        order to detect contexts. We used the following criteria for a context to be
                        included in our corpus:
                            It contains more than 7 words, and
                            The contexts do not repeat. We check the repetition by comparing
                                the first significant wordform to the left and to the right of the
                                given wordform (significant wordform here means that we do not take
                                into account auxiliary words like articles, prepositions,
                            etc.)
                        
                    The contexts that have not met these criteria were not included in the
                        corpus.
                    After execution of the program we had the corpus which has contexts for each
                        wordform of Spanish. To store it we used the data base format, though it can
                        be easily exported in a pure text format.
                    Let us have a look at the example of the obtained contexts. Say, for the
                        wordform abades (abbots) it was necessary to obtain just 2 context (all the
                        rest contexts were for the wordform abad (abbot) in singular):
                        San Benito en los monasterios de todo el Imperio carolingio . En el año
                            910 se funda en Galia la famosa abadí­a de Cluny, cuyos primeros abases,
                            los santos Odón, Odilón, Mayolo, Hugo y Pedro el Venerable, buscaron
                            manifestar por medio de la liturgia, el...
                        
                        su contenido doctrinal y su definitiva cohesión como Orden, extendida
                            muy rápidamente por toda Europa. En 1215 el IV Concilio Lateranense
                            prescribe reuniones trienales de los abades de monasterios de una misma
                            región, y visitas periódicas para velar por la observancia. El papa
                            Benedicto XII reagrupa a los monasterios en provincias...
                
                
                    Conclusions and future work
                    We presented the system that permits to build the local representative corpus
                        of words using Internet as a source. We chose the following criterion of a
                        representative corpus: the presence of all wordforms in the proportion that
                        they have in the Internet documents.
                    The method was applied to 30,000 lemmas of the Spanish language. The obtained
                        corpus is representative from morphological and lexical points of view.
                    There are several directions of further investigations:
                            To evaluate to what degree the obtained corpus is representative,
                                maybe, comparing with some other corpora.
                            To verify if the criterion of the "acceptable" contexts should be
                                modified.
                            To verify it the chosen value of the context length is
                                appropriate.
                            To develop more exact criteria of the representative corpus in
                                different senses (morphological, lexical, syntactic,
                            semantic).
                        
                
                
                    Acknowledgements
                    The work was done under partial support of CONACyT, CGEPI/COFAA-IPN, and SNI,
                        Mexico.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Biber
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Conrad
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Reppen
                                
                            
                            Corpus linguistics. Investigating language structure
                                and use
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Jones
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Ghani
                                
                            
                            Automatically building a corpus for a minority language
                                from the web
                        
                        
                            38th Meeting of the ACL, Proceedings of the Student
                                Research Workshop. Hong Kong. October 2000
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                                29-36
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Kilgariff
                                
                            
                            Web as Corpus
                        
                        
                            Proc. of Corpus Linguistics 2001 conference
                            University center for computer corpus research on
                                language, technical papers vol. 13, Lancaster University
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                                342-344
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
