


    
        
            
                Forensic linguistics: the contribution of humanities
                    computing
                
                    
                        László
                        Hunyadi
                        
                            University of Debrecen
                            hunyadi@llab2.arts.klte.hu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Enikő
                        Tóth
                        
                            University of Debrecen
                            teniko@pmail.arts.klte.hu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Kálmán
                        Abari
                        
                            University of Debrecen
                            abarik@pmail.arts.klte.hu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of Tübingen
                
                Tübingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Abstract:
                    The aim of the talk is to demonstrate how useful humanities computing can
                        prove to be in solving issues of a seemingly as distant field as forensic
                        science. We will present a case study of an actual forensic linguistic
                        assignment whose aim it was to determine if a digitalized recording of a
                        conversation had been tempered. The task, highly challenging due to its
                        novelty both in applied linguistics and forensic practice, was carried out
                        by investigating three independent aspects of the issue: those of
                        experimental phonetics, situational semantics and computation. The results
                        of the three approaches were synthesized to give a comprehensive basis for
                        an answer to the initial question.
                
                
                    Introduction:
                    To find a proof for or against the assumption that a given document has been
                        tempered with is one of the important tasks of forensic science. With the
                        introduction of various voice-recording techniques it became especially
                        important to decide whether or not such a recording can authentically
                        represent a certain event of reference. The case of magnetic tape recordings
                        is relatively simple, since any (either electronic or mechanical)
                        modification of the tape leaves a trace behind, characteristic even of the
                        kind of manipulation (cf. Gruber et al. 1995, Gruber et al. 1993, Poza
                        1979). However, with digital recordings gaining more and more popularity in
                        our days, on the one hand, and digital manipulation becoming technically
                        possible and easy, on the other, one might believe that the discovery of
                        such a manipulation is highly unlikely. The novelty of the issue in
                        scientific literature just adds to this challenge. In order to carry out the
                        task, we had two assumptions: a. due to human voice having a highly complex
                        structure, even digital tempering by a person might leave a significant
                        trace, and b. due to conversations also having their strict internal
                        structure, the removal of a segment of the given conversation might also be
                        noticeable.
                
                
                    Discussion:
                    The findings of the three approaches were as follows:
                    
                        1. A detailed spectrographic analysis of digitalized voice recordings
                            found a characteristic pattern with a duration of 8-10 milliseconds at
                            the place where a segment had been digitally removed. Although this
                            pattern varied according to the actual immediate environment, its
                            characteristic features could be established (a symmetrical increase of
                            intensity as well as a 500 Hz increase of frequency). This
                            spectrographic pattern was only manifested in the exact location of
                            recordings with a digital cut. Applying the methodology to the given
                            task, we found that no spectrographic trace of this kind of manipulation
                            could be identified.
                        2. The aim of the situational-semantic study was to find out if an
                            eventual cutting of a portion of the text could have possibly left a
                            trace that can be identified as semantically significant. Our attention
                            was directed to the analysis of the appropriateness of pieces of
                            linguistic material with a referential function, including pronouns,
                            determiners and names (cf. Brown et al. 1983, Kamp 1981). The analysis
                            pointed at some places where the reference was not unambiguously
                            computable from the immediate linguistic environment, but since in
                            running conversation such immediate turns often happen, they could not
                            be decided on the basis of linguistic content alone. These locations
                            became thus subject to spectrographic analysis, and the latter concluded
                            that no tempering could be identified there.
                        3. In our work we included a separate computational task to find out
                            if segments of an eventual cut in the voice recording were still
                            recoverable from the hard disk originally used for digitizing. Since it
                            turned out that the hard disk had been completely reformatted, we could
                            not complete this task. However, we elaborated a methodology for similar
                            tasks and applied it in model situations. The applied statistical method
                            of zero crossing proved to yield significant interpretable results in
                            the differentiation of headerless segments of certain types of files.
                            This method showed a significant difference between .bmp and .txt files,
                            and .wav files also had a characteristic value for zero-crossing. Thus,
                            we suggest that this methodology may be useful for the possible
                            differentiation of at least a few types of files in future work.
                    
                
                
                    Summary:
                    This case study showed us that humanities computing can have a significant
                        contribution to forensic science, especially in the form of a combination of
                        theoretical and applied linguistics as well as statistics and computing.
                        This assignment was a real challenge for us, and it resulted in the
                        elaboration of a new methodology both in experimental phonetics and
                        computation. Thus proving the inspiring force of humanities computing across
                        various fields of science.
                
            
        
        
            
                References:
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    Brown
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    Yule
                                
                            
                            Discourse Analysis
                            
                                
                                CUP
                                1983
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Kamp
                                
                            
                            A theory of truth and semantic representation
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Groenendijk
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    T.
                                    Janssen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Stokhof
                                
                            
                            Formal Methods in the Study of Language
                            
                                Amsterdam
                                Mathematical Centre
                                1981
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    S.
                                    Gruber
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    F.
                                    Poza
                                
                            
                            Voicegram Identification Evidence
                        
                        
                            American Jurisprudence Trials
                            
                                Lawyers Cooperative Publishing
                                54
                                
                                
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    S.
                                    Gruber
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    F.
                                    Poza
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    J.
                                    Pellicano
                                
                            
                            Audio Recordings: Evidence, Experts and
                            Technology
                        
                        
                            American Jurisprudence Trials
                            
                                Lawyers Cooperative Publishing
                                48
                                
                                
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            On the Theory and Practice of Voice Identification
                            
                                
                                    F.
                                    Poza
                                
                                (Technical Consultant)
                            
                            
                                
                                National Academy of Sciences
                                1979
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
