


    
        
            
                There is Virtue in Virtuality. Future potentials of
                    electronic humanities scholarship
                
                    
                        Hans
                        Walter
                       Gabler
                        
                            Ludwig-Maximilans-Universit채t M체nchen
                            hans-walter.gabler@anglistik.uni.muenchen.de
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2002
                
                    University of T체bingen
                
                T체bingen
            
            
                ALLC/ACH 2002
                
                    editor
                    
                        Harald
                        Fuchs
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        invited paper
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The established present use of the computer in the humanities is to enhance the
                    properties and quality of the book. With the book electronically stored, book
                    contents and book knowledge can be accessed fast and very flexibly; while the
                    physical book, widely still the end product of computer deployment, can be
                    manufactured more accurately, perhaps even more economically, than under the
                    conventional conditions of the composition room and press. Beyond the token book
                    in electronic storage, and the real book generated by electronic means to
                    habitually palpable materiality, paperwork and the book provide significant
                    metaphors for computer-related discourse, with the file or the home page heading
                    the terminology. This is a specific indication of a patterning of thought
                    according to inherited figurations that is as tenacious as it is universal.
                In the face of the forces of habit, the question arises how clearly the
                    book-conditioned and book-trained humanities scholar and researcher is capable
                    of discerning the unique otherness of the electronic medium and both explore and
                    exploit its potential. I suggest that the grasp hitherto, in humanities
                    scholarship at least, of the essential virtuality of the electronic medium does
                    not securely reach further than to a simulation of the materialities of paper
                    and print. Hence an orientation towards the future requires reflecting on how
                    the virtuality of the electronic medium uniquely might put us in a position to
                    deconventionalize our scholarly pursuits and innovate them.
                Such reflections should not remain abstract and arcane. Examples will help to
                    flesh them out. A main area for applying the computer is that of the
                    organisation of knowledge. Handbooks, dictionaries and the like are already
                    preferred objects of conversion into electronic multi-mediality. A distinct
                    qualitative step might however be taken if, from its very conception, the
                    organisation of knowledge is not projected as going linearly (with
                    cross-reference props) into book form and bookish formats, but relationally into
                    the virtuality of the computer. The example of an incipient project on such
                    terms will be cited. A specific sub-area, furthermore, of the organisation of
                    knowledge is the commentary on a given text, or body of texts. The thrust of the
                    arrangement of commentary in book-printing practice is currently linear - it
                    having been largely forgotten how early book typography was already capable of
                    suggesting relationalities (and so was properly 'hypertextual' avant la lettre). But the relationality of the
                    electronic medium will encourage a re-transforming of commentary into something
                    akin to that early understanding of the essential relationality of the
                    represented matter itself. Again, an example will illustrate the issues as
                    indicating some first principles in need of developing towards the
                    systematisation and organising of the computer commentary.
                This should lead to a brief glance at a project under way exemplifying an
                    ambition to set up the scholar's and critic's working desk virtually by
                    assembling all requisite primary and secondary materials relative to a
                    pre-defined research interest on one internet website globally accessible. The
                    Italo-Franco-German project HyperNietzsche currently under development from its
                    German base in Munich is making the bid for such comprehensiveness. Against its
                    heterogeneity, one may hold that it is textual editing that remains a pivotal -
                    and perhaps the central - area of humanities scholarship. It has the longest,
                    and intrinsically most bookish, tradition. It would seem particularly necessary,
                    therefore, that the tradition's centeredness on the book not remain
                    unreflected.
                Textual scholarship's critical self-distancing is aided by literary and textual
                    theory that focuses the process nature of texts in reading as in composition. To
                    such general theory, the counterpart, in theorizings of the electronic medium,
                    are current notions of hypertext. The concept of hypertext, however, does not by
                    itself guarantee an electronic text edition properly so called, exploiting, if
                    worthy the definition, the medium's virtuality on its own terms. Considerable
                    rethinking of procedures and presentational modes is required to develop,
                    organise and realise electronic editions as medium-specific alternatives to
                    scholarly editions in book form. An example, again, will serve to indicate
                    directions for development. Finally, in this paper, I wish to introduce (and
                    demonstrate) a distinction between electronic text editions and the electronic
                    editing of processes of manuscript writing. With the critically editorial
                    exploration of manuscripts as sites of writing and of writing processes as the
                    successive, yet random, filling of writing space, the editorial branch of
                    humanities scholarship cuts the moorings to the book. Such exploration is
                    possible only in the virtuality of the electronic medium and its evanescent
                    screen images.
            
        
    
