


    
        
            
                AAC - Digital Resources in Textual Studies
                
                    
                        Hanno
                        Biber
                        AAC (Austrian Academy Corpus), Austrian
                                Academy of Sciences
                            hanno.biber@oeaw.ac.at
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Evelyn
                        Breiteneder
                        AAC (Austrian Academy Corpus), Austrian
                                Academy of Sciences
                            evelyn.breiteneder@oeaw.ac.at
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Karlheinz
                        Moerth
                        AAC (Austrian Academy Corpus), Austrian
                                Academy of Sciences
                            karlheinz.moerth@oeaw.ac.at
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        corpus
                        text encoding
                        XML
                        literature
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    The Austrian Academy Corpus (AAC) is a newly founded institution based at the
                        Austrian Academy of Sciences in Vienna. It was designed to set up a text
                        corpus and to conduct research in the field of electronic text corpora. The
                        AAC working group has had expertise in digital text studies and in
                        lexicography for more than ten years. For a long time electronic text
                        collections were primarily focused on linguistic studies and on
                        lexicography. Only recently has the perspective changed towards providing
                        material for scholars interested in texts from various fields of the
                        humanities. The AAC has been trying to find solutions that meet the needs of
                        textual studies and convey essential information about language and history.
                        The aim of the proposed poster is to investigate the potential of digital
                        resources for textual studies in various fields of the humanities. The
                        electronic text collections established at the AAC so far and its future
                        projects will mainly focus on electronic representations not only of
                        literary texts, literary magazines, journals and newspapers but also on a
                        carefully considered selection of texts from many cultural and social
                        domains.
                    The poster will consider the advance of new systems of digital representation
                        and its implications for the study of language, literature and cultural
                        history. Digital resources in the form of electronic text corpora should be
                        regarded as structures for representing complex information. Journals and
                        newspapers pose an especially difficult task when it comes to representation
                        in digital form. An equally difficult task is the analysis and description
                        of the mediaís decisive historical influences and contexts. The poster,
                        which will be a digital projection, will comprise three parts that will show
                        the range of interests pursued in the AAC research group. The first part
                        will deal with the general organisational structures of the AAC. The second
                        part will be concerned with the specific selection criteria for the great
                        variety of texts which will form the AAC. Finally, the third part will
                        examine practical issues in digitising the magazine ìDie Weltb¸hneî, giving
                        special attention to the applicability of XML Schemas in literary
                        computing.
                
                
                    1) AAC Structures
                    Research projects in the field of humanities computing rely heavily on
                        cooperation, collaboration and the constant exchange of knowledge and
                        expertise. The AAC will eventually be accessible on the internet, where
                        innovative and collaborative presentation techniques and current graphic
                        design developments will be utilised. However, being a research unit within
                        the Austrian Academy of Sciences, the AAC is also set within the wider
                        framework of a trilateral research scheme organized and planned at the
                        Austrian Academy of Science in Vienna, the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of
                        Sciences and Humanities in Berlin and the Swiss Academy of Humanities and
                        Social Sciences in Berne. In such a wider perspective, the common and
                        individual settings and conditions of the German language will have to be
                        taken into consideration, as will their historical and contemporary
                        literatures of various kinds. The constant cultural exchange between the
                        three countries opens particular research areas and fields of study for the
                        linguists and scholars engaged in the establishment of digital resources and
                        in computing activities in the humanities in the three countries. Whereas
                        the efforts undertaken in Berlin and Berne are predominantly concerned with
                        providing selected data and texts of the 20th century mainly for
                        lexicographic purposes, the Austrian Academy of Sciences intends to tackle
                        the problem of digital representation of scholarly, journalistic and
                        political texts which were of considerable influence between 1848 and 1989.
                        The Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities has started its
                        project of a Digital Dictionary of the 20th Century German Language, the
                        main task being to develop a dictionary system and a prime source for
                        linguistic and lexicographic information. The Swiss Academy of Humanities
                        and Social Sciences in Berne has recently joined the efforts of this
                        trilateral cooperation.
                
                
                    2) AAC Selection
                     To set up a text corpus several conditions and considerations are required.
                        In the past twenty years, electronic text corpora have been built up in
                        academic institutions of many European countries, such as France, Norway,
                        Sweden, Slovenia, Spain, the Czech Republic, and the UK. The setting up of
                        these corpora is motivated by the stateís will to document the national
                        language in a comprehensive manner and to make the corpora available for
                        scientific, especially linguistic, application. The AAC has a different
                        starting point. For the construction of an Austrian corpus one must consider
                        complicated issues relating to the history of the past two hundred years on
                        the one hand and to our own specific interests on the other. The text
                        selection for the AAC, which will take place at the same time as the corpus
                        work, will be guided by thematic and empirical criteria, as well as factors
                        specifically related to the type of text. The specificity of text type is
                        therefore a factor for the choice of texts, but also for their
                        categorisation in a corpus: letters by Oskar Kokoschka, anecdotes by Max
                        Liebermann, writings of Adolf Loos, narrations by Adalbert Stifter, feature
                        articles by Daniel Spitzer, funeral sermons and electoral speeches,
                        propaganda slogans and advertising slogans, pop song lyrics and political
                        speeches, comic books, instructions, travel guides, TV programmes, mailing
                        cataloguesthese and other text types as well as the various kinds of text
                        ëcarrierí are important for the choice of text.
                     In recent years, the establishment of large German language corpora has been
                        restricted to the field of linguistic and lexicographic studies. So far,
                        there have not been any large-scale endeavours in the area of text-centred
                        studies. Although more and more literary texts are becoming available, many
                        of these came into existence as by-products of efforts to amass data for
                        lexicographic research. Generally speaking, the historical period on which
                        the AAC is working is poorly documented in terms of digital literary texts.
                        This applies even more when it comes to collective text ëcarriersí such as
                        magazines, papers, year-books, commemorative volumes and similar materials.
                        To our knowledge there do not exist any large amounts of digitised
                        historical magazines or papers in the German language. The sources being
                        digitised for the AAC at the moment are historical literary magazines of
                        major importance. In the first instance there is ìDer Brennerî, which was
                        published by Ludwig Ficker in Innsbruck from 1910 until 1934. Among the
                        contributors to the ìBrennerî are figures as renowned as Carl Dallago,
                        Theodor Haecker, Else Lasker-Sch¸ler, Adolf Loos and Georg Trakl. The other
                        two magazines on which the AAC is working were both published in Berlin. The
                        journal ìDie Aktionî (1911 -1932) was edited by Franz Pfemfert. Among its
                        contributors were Peter Altenberg, Hermann Bahr, Walter Benjamin, Max Brod,
                        Richard Dehmel, Salomo Friedlaender, Georg Heym, Kurt Hiller, Max
                        Oppenheimer, Egon Schiele and August Strindberg. The last journal to be
                        mentioned here and perhaps the most important one of those being worked on
                        at the moment is the weekly Berlin journal ëDie Schaub¸hneí (1905 - 1918),
                        later renamed ëDie Weltb¸hneí (1918 - 1933,) which was edited by Siegfried
                        Jacobson, Kurt Tucholsky and Carl von Ossietzky. Among the writers who
                        contributed to the ëWeltb¸hneí were Henry Barbusse, Bertolt Brecht, Alfred
                        D–blin, Lion Feuchtwanger, Arthur Koestler, Heinrich Mann, Alfred Polgar,
                        Romain Rolland and Leon Trotsky.
                
                
                    3) AAC XML-Schemas
                    To produce a digital version of the magazine ìDie Weltb¸hneî, the original
                        text has to undergo the usual stages of electronic processing: After being
                        scanned, the text is made readable by means of up-to-date OCR. Then pages,
                        paragraphs and lines are identified by automatic routines. The application
                        of markup is the last step in this process. Tags describing contents are
                        carefully inserted by literary scholars especially trained for this job.
                        This process, which takes several runs, is accompanied by proofreading
                        against the original and constant checking and validating of the achieved
                        results. Literary projects in the past used to employ SGML, very often in
                        connection with the TEI guidelines. The AAC also makes extensive use of
                        XMLís modular system of specifications. Aside from the basic XML
                        specification, several other specifications exist, all of them having their
                        more or less well-defined place within the overall framework. The exact
                        nature of some of these sub-specifications is not yet clear (XLink, XML
                        Query), as everything is very much in a state of flux at the moment. Those
                        that are classified as recommendations are XSLT (Extensible Stylesheet
                        Transformations) and XPath (a language for addressing parts of an XML
                        document). The implications of others such as XLink (Extensible Linking
                        Language), XPointer (an abstract language that specifies locations), and XQL
                        (Extensible Query Language) for literary computing will have to be
                        considered in due course. As XML comes of age, the issue of a standard way
                        of defining the structure of documents becomes more and more important. Both
                        traditional DTDs (document type definitions) and XML Schemas are
                        technologies that provide such descriptions of document structures. Whereas
                        DTDs in the traditional sense have been around for some time and are widely
                        accepted in the field of SGML-based text-encoding, XML Schemas must be
                        regarded as a fledgling technology that still has to win its spurs.
                    XML Schemas are commonly regarded as an attempt at an XML answer to the
                        problem of defining the structure, content and semantics of documents. There
                        are several arguments in favour of XML Schemas, among which are XML syntax,
                        object orientation, inheritance, polymorphism and datatyping. Firstly, XML
                        Schemas follow XML syntax rules, which makes it possible to parse them with
                        XML tools. Nowadays, authors of XML documents often regard traditional DTDs
                        as unwieldy and inconsistent with the structure of the overall XML system.
                        With XML Schemas, validating parsers can be built on the basis of XML
                        syntax. Secondly, XML Schemas may include explicit restrictions on the data
                        types an element may hold. They let the text programmer attribute data types
                        such as strings, numbers (integer, floating point), date and time formats,
                        boolean and others to elements constituting an XML document. In addition,
                        XML Schemas are also supposed to allow the text worker to define new data
                        types to refine the markup system being used. The AACís experiences in
                        applying this new technology, focusing on the issue of DTDs and XML Schemas
                        in processing text corpora will be described and some details will be given
                        of the pilot phase of the AACís project of establishing a corpus.
                
            
        
        
            
                Selected references
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Istvan
                                    Deak
                                
                            
                            Weimar Germany's Left-Wing Intellectuals: A Political
                                History of the Weltbühne and its Circle
                            
                                Berkley and Los Angeles
                                
                                1968
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    Dietzel
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Hans-Otto
                                    Hügel
                                
                            
                            Deutsche literarische Zeitschriften, 1880-1945 : ein
                                Repertorium
                            
                                München, New York, London, Paris
                                
                                1988
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Document Object Model (DOM) Level 3 Core Specification.
                                Version 1.0
                            W3C Working Draft 01 September, 2000
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                        ()
                    
                
                
                    
                        Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Second
                            Edition)
                        W3C Recommendation 6 October 2000
                        
                            
                            
                            2000
                        
                    
                    ()
                
                
                    
                        Extensible Stylesheet Language (XSL) Version 1.0.
                        W3C Working Draft 27 March 2000
                        
                            
                            
                            2000
                        
                    
                    ()
                
                
                    
                        XML Path Language (XPath) Version 1.0
                        W3C Recommendation 16 November 1999
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            1999
                        
                    
                    ()
                
                
                    
                        XML Schema Part 0: Primer
                        W3C Candidate Recommendation 24 October 2000
                        
                            
                            
                            2000
                        
                    
                    ()
                
                
                    
                        XML Schema Part 1: Structures
                        W3C Candidate Recommendation 24 October 2000
                        
                            
                            
                            2000
                        
                    
                    ()
                
                
                    
                        XML Schema Part 2: Datatypes
                        W3C Candidate Recommendation 24 October 2000
                        
                            
                            
                            2000
                        
                    
                    ()
                
                
                    
                        XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 1.0
                        W3C Recommendation 16 November 1999
                        
                            
                            
                            1999
                        
                    
                    ()
                
            
        
    
