


    
        
            
                Building Belphegor: A Multilingual Electronic Journal
                    using TEI
                
                    
                        Vivien
                        Hannon
                        
                            Dalhousie University Electronic Text Centre/Academic
                                Computing Services
                            Vivien.Hannon@Dal.CA
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Bruno
                        Roy
                        
                            Dalhousie University Electronic Text Centre/Academic
                                Computing Services
                            Bruno.Roy@Dal.CA
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Vittorio
                        Frigerio
                        
                            Dalhousie University French Department
                                Vittorio.Frigerio@Dal.CA
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        John
                        Barnstead
                        
                            Dalhousie University Department of Russian
                            Studies John.Barnstead@Dal.CA
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Oriel
                        MacLennan
                        
                            Dalhousie University Electronic Text Centre/Killam
                                Library
                            Oriel.MacLennan@Dal.CA
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            

                
                    
                        TEI
                        E-Journal
                        Multilingual
                    
                
            
        

    
    
        
            
                
                    Belphegor is the first e-journal to be published at
                        the Dalhousie University Electronic Text Centre, and has presented
                        challenges because of its multilingual character. Readers may choose to view
                        the journal in one of six languages: French, English, German, Portuguese,
                        Spanish or Italian. Papers published in the journal may be in any one of the
                        languages; abstracts are offered in more than one language. All information
                        about the journal itself, the authors, the editorial committee, etc. is
                        offered in all six languages. Many images presented on the pages have
                        different versions for each of the languages.
                    While many e-journals are originally created in HTML, it was decided in this
                        case to create a single XML-compliant TEI-encoded file for each issue,
                        containing all the text required for the HTML pages, using entity
                        definitions for images. A "mock-up" partial set of pages was created in HTML
                        and used as a sort of design sketch to help with the creation of Belphegor's
                        TEI template. This template was created keeping in mind that we will be
                        working on other journals in the future; it can be easily customized.
                    Using a custom Perl script, a TEI file created using the template is then
                        converted to a set of HTML files. Another Perl script is used to translate
                        the TEI file to PDF, creating a version of the journal issue which is
                        optimised for printing. Using different scripted translators, the TEI
                        document could later be converted to other formats at the request of the
                        editors - for example, e-book, LaTeX or Postscript. The journal's appearance
                        can easily be modified by adjusting the translator script and creating new
                        graphics if needed.
                    The search page is designed to take advantage of the TEI markup and allow
                        readers to search using various criteria; for example, authors' names,
                        titles of works, dates and places.
                    As a bonus, we will demonstrate to interested parties an example of the use
                        of digital media in humanities research in the Kuzmin
                            Collection, which presents materials associated with the Russian
                        poet, novelist, dramatist, and composer Mikhail Kuzmin (1872-1936), a key
                        figure in the development of the twentieth century Russian avant-garde.
                        Research into neglected aspects of Kuzmin's musical compositions and
                        settings of his poetry by figures of the "repressed Russian avant-garde" has
                        been facilitated by use of computer-assisted music transcription. The
                        Electronic Text Centre allows the presentation of this research to a
                        widely-scattered scholarly audience at minimal expense, in a much more
                        useful form than would be possible using traditional forms of publication.
                        By giving students "hands-on" experience in ongoing scholarly research and
                        translation, and by providing the means to examine the interrelationships of
                        poetry, music, and the visual arts, the Dalhousie University Electronic Text
                        Centre makes a growing contribution to the life of the University and its
                        mission to serve the community. 
                
            
        
    
