


    
        
            
                Markup vs. Character Encoding: The quandary of handling
                    the epigraphical/papyrological “underdot” in computer representation 
                
                    
                        Deborah
                        Anderson
                        Dept. of Linguistics, UC Berkeley
                            dwanders@socrates.berkeley.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        markup
                        Unicode
                        underdot
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Problem
                    When dealing with ancient texts written on various media for detailed
                        scholarly publication, it is critical to convey information on the specifics
                        of the writing. After a photo, scanned image, or line drawing is made from
                        the original text, texts are commonly transferred to paper or an electronic
                        medium. In order to capture the information from the inscription,
                        transliteration and transcription schemes in Roman letters (or Greek, for
                        materials using Greek script) are often used to capture all the
                        characters--whether clearly legible, faint, damaged--and the empty
                        spaces.
                    Ancient texts, especially those in damaged condition, present difficulties,
                        for they must rely upon the subjective judgment of the transcriber (and
                        editor) in deciding what characters are present, whether an erasure is
                        identifiable, the amount of empty space(s), etc. Certain conventions on how
                        to represent these details have been created and are followed in various
                        fields (i.e., double square brackets [[ ]] enclose erasures, angle brackets
                        &lt; &gt; indicate letters made in err by the scribe). A common method in
                        transliteration and transcription for denoting a damaged character--or one
                        whose identity is uncertain--is a dot placed below a letter. This underdot
                        is common in ancient Greek texts and Latin, for example, at least those
                        editions intended for the scholar interested in paleography, philology,
                        etc.
                    A problem arises in how to handle the underdot in computer representation.
                        This question surfaced in a project done at UC Berkeley in conjunction with
                        the Berkeley Library, wherein the Indo-European Studies
                            Bulletin, a publication affiliated with the UCLA Indo-European
                        Studies Program, was being put online, using XML, Unicode, and a TEI-Lite
                        DTD. The underdot appeared in a Sabellian inscription. Since our project
                        intended to test out the use of Unicode, we reviewed the options available
                        in Unicode and employed the combining underdot (U+0323) after the character.
                        On the surface level, this reflected the character represented in the
                        Sabellian article. However, the combining underdot raised a potential
                        problem: by interrupting the plain text string with the diacritic, searching
                        for the entire word could be impeded, unless the underdot was taken into
                        account when searching. More importantly, should the underdot actually be
                        encoded as a separate character? Is it on the same level as an “a acute”,
                        for example, where the diacritic is an essential part of the character? Or
                        should markup be used, such as denoting the sign with a &lt;damage&gt;
                        and/or &lt;unclear&gt; tag? Markup then could be visually rendered according
                        to one’s own convention or taste.
                    Since Unicode support is only just now becoming more prevalent in new
                        software and hardware, most computer projects have adopted ASCII
                        representations of the underdot and other epigraphic and papyrological
                        symbols. For Greek, the Beta Code of the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae has been
                        widely adopted by projects (such as Perseus). Eventually, a changeover to
                        Unicode will occur, and the need to decide how to handle it is becoming more
                        pressing: should one use a character encoding or markup?
                    The underdot is but one member of a long list of epigraphic and papyrological
                        symbols used in transcription and transliteration. An agreement amongst
                        scholars ought to be made if there is to be consistency in handling these
                        symbols within the same discipline and across disciplines, since similar
                        problems are faced in other fields. Currently, Unicode proposals on
                        cuneiform, Coptic, and Iranian await to see how the problem is resolved in
                        the Greek and Latin sphere, since it will influence their projects. Or are
                        the variations between fields (and lack of communication so great) that a
                        discipline-specific approach will prevail?
                
                
                    Issues
                    A number of important issues arise when reviewing the problem more deeply:
                            --While the underdot is frequently used to indicate damage or
                                uncertainty, it is not necessarily consistently used with this broad
                                definition, even in ancient Greek materials. In a standard book used
                                for Greek dialects, Carl Darling Buck’s The Greek
                                    Dialects (Chicago and London, 1955), he states: “The
                                occasional use of a dot under a letter indicates that it is
                                mutilated. But this is commonly disregarded if the proper reading is
                                reasonably certain” (p. 184). In Mycenaean materials (Emmett
                                Bennett, Jr., and Jean-Pierre Olivier, The Pylos
                                    Tablets Transcribed, Part I: Texts and Notes, Rome,
                                1973), however, an underdot under a digit can indicate that there is
                                a question whether the number is in the text at all, a problem
                                regarding the identity of the number, or it may merely indicate that
                                the number is almost illegible” (p. 10). Indeed, if fine
                                granularity of a text is intended, “damage” and
                                “uncertainty” can and probably should be separated as two
                                distinct elements, and this is so done in a new proposal,
                                “Epidoc”, being worked by at the University of North Carolina by
                                Tom Elliott, Hugh Cayless, and Helen Hawkins (, ).
                            --In some languages, an underdot has a specific phonetic meaning.
                                In Sanskrit, it is used for a retroflex s. The phonetic sense
                                specific to the underdot is at variance with the unclear sign
                                meaning. Potential confusion with the phonetic sign is possible in
                                searching.
                            --One potential problem of character-encoding with Unicode is an
                                apparent ambiguity of certain signs for the naive user. A scholar
                                looking for a combining underdot when skimming through the Unicode
                                Standard (or scrolling down the choices under MS Office 2000’s
                                Arial Unicode MS font) may choose, quite incorrectly, U+093C, the
                                Devanagari sign nukta, which has very specific use. This error would
                                cause problems for searching and rendering.
                            --A number of characters for damaged signs are proposed in a
                                Unicode proposal for Egyptian hieroglyphs. While such signs would
                                appear with the hieroglyphic characters and not in a Roman-type
                                transliteration/transcription scheme, it significantly offers a
                                character-encoded model for conveying a damaged sign, and not one
                                based on markup. Could this option peacefully co-exist with a
                                markup-only approach used in other projects and is this
                                advisable?
                            --Unicode will allow using the ancient scripts more fully, since
                                the character encoding standard should allow for easier writing,
                                rendering, and printing of the original scripts, beyond what printed
                                publications have been able to offer in the past. (However, this is
                                only possible with necessary Unicode-enabled operating system,
                                software, and font support for the characters are present.) Hence, a
                                fuller representation of a text with the ancient scripts could be
                                added between the layers of photo/drawing and Romanized
                                transliteration/transcription. Instead of using an underdot to
                                indicate a faint letter, for example, markup could be used with the
                                original script (as well as the transliterated/transcribed version)
                                to make the sign (or letter) appear fainter or in a slightly
                                different color.
                            --A consistent markup scheme could be used with a style sheet to
                                render the faint/damaged letter in a variety of ways, as suggested
                                above, offering wide extensibility. If a text is intended for
                                beginners, the markup indicating the traces of letters or erasures
                                could be disregarded. If Hittite scholars regularly used a special
                                symbol for a mutilated sign, for example, this could also be
                                accommodated by changes to the style sheet.
                            --Since new Unicode character encoding proposals can take from two
                                to five years from the first proposal until approval into ISO 10646,
                                markup offers a much quicker solution. A “best practices” guide
                                to markup, similar to the Epidoc proposal, would be needed.
                        
                    
                
                
                    A Possible Solution?
                    Markup seems to present the best option, for it allows flexibility and
                        provides a speedier means to put epigraphic/papyrological text information
                        on the Web. Also, the use of the underdot reflects information regarding
                        damage/uncertainty/etc. of a character, and hence is probably best not
                        encoded as a separate character. However, if markup is to be advocated as
                        the best approach here, can user-friendly software be created in the
                        foreseeable future for typing and rendering of such markup schemes? This
                        poster is intended to encourage further open discussion on the “underdot
                        quandary” and its ramifications, and to seek input from others,
                        particularly those with projects on ancient texts or whose expertise is on
                        markup and relevant technology.
                
            
        
    
