


    
        
            
                Optical Music Recognition: Stroke Tracing and
                    Reconstruction of Handwritten Manuscripts
                
                    
                        Kia
                        Ng
                        
                            University of Leeds
                            kia@kcng.org
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                 
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        document imaging
                        pattern
                        music
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Nowadays, the computer is an important instrument in music. It can not only
                    generate sound (audio synthesis) but is also able to perform a wide range of
                    time consuming and repetitive tasks, such as transposition and part extraction,
                    with speed and accuracy. However, a score must be represented in a
                    machine-readable format before any operation can be carried out. Current input
                    methods, such as using an electronic keyboard, are laborious and require human
                    intervention. Optical Music Recognition (OMR) provides an efficient and
                    automatic method to transform paper-based music scores into a machine
                    representation.
                The potential benefits of an Optical Music Recognition system were recognised
                    over thirty years ago. A robust OMR system can provide a convenient and
                    time-saving input method to transform paper-based music scores into a machine
                    readable format for widely available music software, in the same way as Optical
                    Character Recognition (OCR) is useful for text processing applications.
                In this paper, we present a brief survey of Optical Music Recognition
                    developments and currently available commercial packages for printed music
                    scores, followed by an introduction to handwritten manuscript recognition with a
                    discussion of the obstacles associated with it. We then discuss our framework
                    design and low-level pre-processing modules, and illustrate the modules with
                    example inputs and outputs. Our prototype takes a digitised music-score grey
                    image (300 d.p.i. with 256 grey) as input. An iterative thresholding method is
                    used to obtain a threshold value, and the image is binarised. Using the black
                    and white image, the skew of the input image, usually introduced during
                    digitisation process, can be automatically detected by reference to the
                    music-typographical features of the roughly parallel stave lines, and the image
                    is deskewed by rotation. This is follow by layout analysis to determine the
                    general normalisation factors including the stave line thickness.
                Stave line thickness and inter-stave-line spacing are used as normalisation
                    factors, as stave lines form a grid system for musical symbols, of which most
                    are related to the geometry of the staves: for example, the height of a note
                    head must approximate the distance between two stave lines plus the thickness of
                    the two stave lines. Hence, the sum of average distance between two stave lines
                    and the average stave-line thickness form the fundamental unit used by the
                    classification process.
                This paper focuses on our stroke-based segmentation approach using a hybrid of
                    edge detection technique and mathematical morphology. We make use of the edges,
                    curvature and variations in relative thickness to extract and segment the
                    musical objects from the underlying grid (stave lines) and disassemble them into
                    lower-level graphical primitives, such as vertical and horizontal lines, curves,
                    ellipses and others. These primitives are classified using a k-Nearest-Neighbour
                    (kNN) classifier with simple features such as the aspect ratio, normalised width
                    and height and other feature vectors. After recognition, these sub-segmented
                    primitives need to be reconstructed.
                As with other forms of optical document analysis, such as OCR, imperfections
                    introduced during the printing and digitising process that are normally
                    tolerable to the human eye can often complicated the recognition process.
                    Musical notation is highly interconnected, and features may connect horizontally
                    (for example beams), vertically (for example chords) or sometimes be overlaid
                    (for example, slurs cutting through stems or bar lines). Furthermore, when
                    symbols are grouped (beamed), they may vary in shape and size: for example,
                    consider the shape of isolated semiquavers and the many possible appearances of
                    four-semiquaver groups. To resolve any ambiguities, contextual information is
                    required, for example, a dot, classified by the kNN classifier, could be an
                    expression sign or a duration modifier depending on its relative position with
                    respect to a note-head nearby.
                After classification and reconstruction, basic musical syntax and a number of
                    high level musical analysis techniques are employed to enhance the recognition,
                    the reconstructed results are re-examined in the light of the analysis and
                    corrections and enhanced guesses are made if necessary. We attempt to detect
                    global information such as the key and time signatures and use them to provide
                    evidence in the detection and correction of possible mis-recognition. It is
                    clearly important that the OMR system should accurately detect the time
                    signature of a piece or section of a piece of music in order to produce an
                    accurate representation of the musical score.
                Many factors in the input source (for example, resolution, contrast, and other
                    inherent complexities) could influence the performance of the automatic
                    recognition and transcription process, especially for handwritten manuscripts.
                    In order to provide flexible and efficient transcriptions, we are designing a
                    graphical user-interface editor with built-in basic musical syntax and some
                    contextual intelligence to resolve uncertainties, assist the transcription and
                    output. The default output format is currently set to ExpMIDI, which is
                    compatible with the standard MIDI file format, and is capable of representing
                    and storing expressive symbols such as accents, phrase markings and others.
                We believe that the application of domain knowledge essential for complex
                    document analysis and recognition and it is particularly important in
                    hand-written-manuscript recognition since it takes years of experience for a
                    trained copyist or engraver to intelligently decipher poorly or inconsistently
                    written scores.
            
        
    
