


    
        
            
                PhiloNet: creating semantic concordances for the
                    analysis of philosophical texts
                
                    
                        Luisa
                        Bentivogli
                        
                            ITC-irst, Trento
                                bentivo@irst.itc.it
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Fabio
                        Pianesi
                        
                            ITC-irst, Trento
                                pianesi@irst.itc.it
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Emanuele
                        Pianta
                        
                            ITC-irst, Trento
                                pianta@irst.itc.it
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        Philosophical text-analysis
                        semantic concordances
                        WordNet
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    1. Introduction
                    The PhiloNet project is a joint effort between ITC-irst and the Department of
                        Philosophy of the University of Bologna that aims at providing students and
                        scholars of philosophy with new computing tools. In particular, we are
                        developing tools for computer-aided analysis of digitized (philosophical)
                        texts capable of overcoming the limits of traditional methods, by offering
                        greater flexibility, analytical power, and adaptation to the goals of
                        different users.
                    In the field of text analysis a number of already available software tools
                        can produce very accurate lists of words, word concordances, word
                        frequencies, collocations and so on (Biber et al., 1998). These
                        computational techniques are all word-based, and they hardly provide support
                        for more sophisticated analyses, like the targeting of concepts. It is
                        conceivable, however, that exactly the latter kind of analytical tools are
                        more suitable for a domain, such as philosophy, where the need for
                        accessing, elucidating, comparing, etc. concepts across and within texts is
                        an important part of the work of scholars. Thus, new computational
                        concept-oriented resources are needed. More precisely, resources must be
                        available that list concepts, enumerate their mutual relationships, and
                        point at their realization at the word level.
                    In this work we report on preliminary results obtained by developing
                        techniques to create concept-based concordances rather than word-based ones,
                        by using generic and domain-specific (philosophical) wordnets as tools.
                
                
                    2. Semantic concordances for text-analysis
                    We use the term "semantic concordance" to refer to the set of text passages
                        in which a concept occurs. Concepts are expressed in texts through words and
                        therefore, to build semantic concordances, two lexical semantic issues must
                        be dealt with: polysemy (when a given word expresses different concepts) and
                        synonymy (when different words express the same concept). If one searches
                        for a concept on the base of a word "w" expressing that concept, polysemy
                        affects precision (the proportion of retrieved words that are actually
                        correct) because along with occurrences of "w" expressing the desired
                        concept, those expressing the other concepts conveyed by "w" will also be
                        retrieved. On the other hand, synonymy affects recall (the proportion of
                        correct words actually retrieved in answer to a search request) because all
                        the synonyms of "w", hence other possible occurrences of the target concept,
                        are missed. Thus, to move from a word-based to a concept-based text-analysis
                        it is necessary to disambiguate each occurrence of a word in a text, and to
                        have a list of the words that can express the same concept.
                    To this purpose, WordNet (Miller,1990) turns out to be a very useful tool.
                        WordNet is a lexical database, created at Princeton University, in which
                        nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs are organized into sets of synonyms
                        (synsets), representing lexical concepts. Synsets are linked by means of
                        various relations, including hypo/hypernymy, meronymy, and antonymy. As far
                        as semantic concordances are concerned, WordNet synsets can be used to
                        extend the search for a word to all its synonyms. Moreover, the relations
                        between synsets can be exploited to search related concepts, something which
                        is absolutely not available with normal word-based techniques. For instance,
                        we can search for a concept and its hyponyms or hypernyms. WordNet can also
                        be useful for addressing the polysemy problem, as it is currently used as a
                        tool for word sense disambiguation (WSD), both automatic and manual. In
                        manual WSD, WordNet plays the role of extensive sense inventory; a
                        well-known effort of this kind is the SemCor project (Miller,1993) in which
                        a subset of the Brown Corpus was tagged with WordNet senses for educational
                        use.
                    Our proposal consists in manually annotating philosophical texts with synsets
                        selected from an extension of the generic WordNet called PhiloNet (which is
                        specialized for the philosophical domain, see below), and having a user
                        interface that given a synset/concept permits the accessing of all the
                        passages in which the concept is used.
                
                
                    3. An example of semantic concordances for philosophical texts
                    In order to experiment with WordNet as a tool for creating semantic
                        concordances, we analyzed the different philosophical concepts expressed by
                        the word "reason" in Pearson's work "The Grammar of Science". The text was
                        digitized by the University of Bologna following the TEI guidelines and
                        using XML-based encoding schemes. The passages of the text relevant for our
                        example were then manually semantically tagged by using the synsets of the
                        specialized philosophical wordnet called PhiloNet.
                    Three different types of concordances have been tested on Pearson's work:
                        traditional word-based concordances, semantic concordances based on the
                        generic Princeton WordNet, and semantic concordances based on the
                        specialized PhiloNet.
                    A simple word-based concordance produces 125 occurrences of the word
                        "reason(s)", including verbs and nouns relating to different senses such as:
                        about these conceptions we reason, endeavouring to ascertain their
                        ask whether we have any reason for conceiving atoms as
                        human powers of perception and reason, lies the mystery and the
                        universe to be guided by reason. But reason, because it is a directive
                            power ...... 
                    As can be seen, with a word-based concordance it is the scholar interested in
                        the study of the philosophical concepts of "reason" who has to single out,
                        among the 125 occurrences found, the ones that are relevant to her purpose. 
                    We expect semantic concordances based on WordNet to deliver more focused
                        information. In WordNet, the word "reason" occurs in six synsets, but only
                        the one reproduced here is relevant for our philosophical purposes: 
                        Sense 3 reason, understanding, intellect -- (the capacity for rational
                            thought or inference or discrimination)
                        hypernym => faculty, mental faculty, module
                    This synset can be considered a philosophical concept, as it refers to the
                        British empiricist tradition starting with Locke, in which reason is broadly
                        viewed as the generic power or faculty of knowing.
                    Having Pearson's text tagged with WordNet synsets and by using the
                        philosophical synset above as a search key to find occurrences of the
                        relevant philosophical concept of reason, we obtain more focused results
                        compared to the ones obtained with the word-based concordance. In fact, 8
                        occurrences of the verb "to reason" and 40 occurrences of the noun "reason",
                        which were retrieved in the word-based concordance seen above, are now
                        dropped because expressing non-philosophical senses. The synset-based search
                        produces 22 occurrences of the philosophical concept as delivered by the
                        word "reason", along with previously undetected occurrences due to synonyms
                        of "reason": 2 occurrences due to the word "understanding", and 4 due to
                        "intellect", as for instance in:
                        the only proof that our intellect has been keen enough to
                        in his Essay concerning Human Understanding, where he writes
                     Furthermore, we can exploit the relations between synsets available from
                        WordNet to obtain information about concepts semantically related to the one
                        we are interested in. In our example we find 27 occurrences of the hypernym
                        of "reason, understanding, intellect", that is "faculty, mental faculty, module":
                        the power of the reasoning faculty possesses of resuming
                        product of the reflective faculty, analyzing the process of
                            perception, ....... 
                    It seems to us that even this simple experiment demonstrates the advantages
                        and power of the semantic concordance methodology based on the current,
                        generic WordNet. However Princeton WordNet, aiming at capturing common
                        linguistic knowledge, contains only one philosophically relevant concept for
                        "reason". Therefore, in a WordNet-based concordance, the other occurrences
                        of the word "reason" in different though philosophically relevant senses are
                        missed.
                    The results of the concept-based concordance of "reason" can be further
                        refined by having access to a specialized philosophical wordnet. To this
                        purpose we used PhiloNet, a wordnet specialized in the philosophical domain,
                        currently under development in conjunction with the University of Bologna.
                        PhiloNet is a component of MultiWordNet (Bentivogli et al., 2000), an
                        aligned multilingual lexical database built at ITC-irst on the basis of
                        Princeton WordNet. PhiloNet is developed in two stages. At the first stage,
                        philosophical synsets already existing in WordNet are identified, labeled as
                        philosophical, and imported into PhiloNet. At the second stage, new
                        philosophical synsets are added to PhiloNet and linked to the generic
                        WordNet. The criterion followed for the identification and for the creation
                        of philosophical synsets is to represent only current philosophical concepts
                        as found in philosophical handbooks. Moreover, PhiloNet allows context
                        labels to be attached to synsets, words, or relations to represent special
                        pieces of information that would be hardly captured by means of the usual
                        lexical and semantic relationships. For instance, if a philosopher or
                        philosophical school uses a idiosyncratic term to refer to a concept that
                        corresponds to a common philosophical concept, a context label can be added
                        to that word in the synset specifying the philosopher/s for which the
                        synonymy holds.
                    Coming back to our example, PhiloNet contains the synset "reason,
                        understanding, intellect" which has been imported from the generic WordNet
                        and other seven philosophical synsets:
                            (1) "reason", a generic synset in which the concept of reason is
                                broadly represented as the most distinctive characteristic of human
                                beings guiding them.
                            (2) "reason, dianoia"
                            (3) "reason, evidence, good sense"
                            (4) "reason, self-consciousness"
                            (5) "reason, calculus, computation"
                            (6) "reason, foundation, essence"
                            (7) "reason, law, natural law, law of nature".
                        
                    We can now perform more sophisticated analyses with respect to those possible
                        on the basis of the generic WordNet. As a result, we can see that in
                        Pearson's work synset (1) occurs 18 times, (6) occurs 28 times, (7) occurs
                        51 times (8 through the word "reason", 14 through "law", 22 through "natural
                        law", 7 through "law of nature") while the other concepts yield no
                        occurrences.
                    Summing up the results of our experiments with the concept of "reason" in
                        Pearson's work "The Grammar of Science", we can see that the three types of
                        concordance provide different levels of precision and recall of the
                        information retrieved:
                            -Word concordance: 125 lines all due to the word "reason" and not
                                distinguishing between relevant (77) and non relevant (48)
                                occurrences. Precision is 61.6% and recall is 61.1%.
                            -WordNet-based semantic concordance: 28 lines all relevant and
                                referring to one philosophical concept (22 due to "reason", 2 to
                                "understand", and 4 to "intellect"). Precision is 100% and recall is
                                22.2%.
                            -PhiloNet-based semantic concordance: 126 lines all relevant and
                                distinguishing four different philosophical concepts. In these 126
                                lines, 77 are due to the word "reason", 2 to "understanding", 4 to
                                "intellect", 14 to "law", 22 to "natural law", and 7 to "law of
                                nature". Both precision and recall amount to 100%.
                        
                
                
                    4. Conclusion and prospects
                     In this paper we have introduced and discussed two levels of concept-based
                        textual analysis: a "linguistic level", relying on a generic WordNet, and a
                        "domain level", requiring a philosophical WordNet.
                    These two levels should be carefully identified and delimited. In particular,
                        it is important that the domain-based wordnet contains only concepts that
                        are widely accepted in the field. Respecting these guidelines will guarantee
                        that the tagging performed on a philosophical text can be used by students
                        and scholars of different theoretical background.
                    At still another level, very specialized wordnets relative to single books
                        make sense, and can be used in the proposed methodology. However, in this
                        case the theoretical background and aims of the scholar building the wordnet
                        and tagging the text become crucial. In a way, the resulting tagged text
                        should be seen more akin to an essay than to a reference work. On the other
                        hand, pushing the metaphor a little further, linguistic and domain-based
                        text analysis can be compared with general dictionaries and philosophy
                        handbooks, respectively.
                     In conclusion, the preliminary results of our research support the
                        feasibility and importance of a concept-based text analysis.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            L.
                                    Bentivogli
                            E.
                                    Pianta
                            F.
                                    Pianesi
                            Coping with lexical gaps when building aligned
                                multilingual wordnets
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the Second International Conference on
                                Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2000), Athens,
                                Greece
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Biber
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Conrad
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Reppen
                                
                            
                            Corpus Linguistics: Investigating Language Structure
                                and Use
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Fellbaum
                                
                            
                             WordNet: an electronic lexical database
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            G.
                                    A.Miller
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Tengi
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    T.
                                    Bunker
                                
                            
                            A Semantic Concordance
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the ARPA Human Language Technology
                                Workshop, San Francisco
                            
                                
                                
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    K.
                                    Pearson
                                
                            
                            The Grammar of Science
                            
                                
                                Thoemmes Antiquarian Books
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
