


    
        
            
                The Norwegian Museum Project
                
                    
                        Christian-Emil
                        Ore
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Øyvind
                        Eide
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            

                
                    
                        museum informatics
                        cultural history
                        digitization
                    
                
            
        

    
    
        
            
                
                    Background
                    Norwegian university museums are custodians of large bodies of knowledge and
                        data about societies, culture, nature and the environment in Norway, both
                        historical and current. An important role of the university museums has been
                        the compilation and dissemination of this information. It is no accident
                        that museums have formed the nucleus for the founding of Norwegian colleges
                        and universities.
                    Due to the magnitude and the organization of the university collections, they
                        have not been readily accessible for use in research, teaching and public
                        services or for inspection by the general public. In order to maintain their
                        position as the country's leading institutions and information pools for
                        object-based research, the university museums must revitalize their
                        collections. An important step in this process is the introduction of
                        information technology at all levels in the museums. However, this calls for
                        an extremely costly reassessment and conversion of existing archives into a
                        digital format, requiring extra effort and additional funding. In some
                        cases, establishing the databases will entail a complete revision of some of
                        the museum collections.
                
                
                    The project
                    The Museum Project (1) was established in the spring of 1998 as a national
                        collaborative project involving all four Norwegian universities. It is
                        planned to run until 2005 with an annual budget of 1-2 million Euro. The aim
                        of the project is to develop common database systems for the management of
                        collections for all the Norwegian university museums. Ideally, these
                        database systems should be able to handle all reference information related
                        to artifact and specimen collections inside and outside the museums.
                        Important aspects include internal requirements regarding the management of
                        collections, fieldwork, research and dissemination, and external demands
                        from the authorities and the public concerning access to reference data.
                    The work is motivated by an ambition to develop IT-based systems that will
                        offer users centralized and efficient access to information regarding the
                        Norwegian cultural and natural heritage. With the help of common user
                        interfaces and links between data from different fields of study, it will be
                        possible to generate new information combinations and new insights in the
                        various disciplines.
                    The Museum Project includes a systems development group that is responsible
                        for modeling and constructing the databases. This group is a direct
                        continuation of the systems development group in the Documentation Project
                        (2). In addition the project employs at least one scientific consultant from
                        a relevant discipline for each of the sub-projects. The consultant is
                        responsible for the follow-up of the scientific aspects of the digitization
                        process and works in close co-operation with colleagues in the relevant
                        field and with the project's system developers.
                    The Museum Project involves the museums of natural history as well as the
                        museums of cultural history. It is organized in various subsections, with
                        sub-projects in the fields of archaeology, ethnography, cultural history,
                        botany, zoology, geology and paleontology. Each of the sub-projects is
                        responsible for the digitization of large collections, some so complex that
                        getting even an overview is difficult. Once the digitized material is
                        recorded, it undergoes a quality control procedure before being entered into
                        databases. The completed databases are all built on the same platform. This
                        implies that while each database accommodates the specific features of each
                        collection the different databases will nonetheless be compatible with one
                        another. The computer programs and methods used for the electronic recording
                        of data are determined by the structure of each collection, and to some
                        extent by the traditions of each discipline.
                
                
                    Technical solutions
                    The Norwegian University Museums cover a wide range of disciplines, from
                        archaeology and ethnography to natural history. The project organization has
                        taken over the responsibility for maintaining and developing the data base
                        systems for the department of lexicography (old Norse and modern Norwegian)
                        and place name studies.
                    The development of the new systems has been continuous process for the last 6
                        years done in parallel with giving assistance to the ongoing digitization of
                        the museum collections and various reference informations. The design and
                        implementation of the common systems and interfaces is now completed and
                        will be presented at the conference.
                    To make data base systems for the large number of disciplines is a challenge
                        for a small group. An extra challenge is the requirement for
                        interdisciplinary searches. The number of databases and the
                        inter-disiplinarity has forced us to try to make as generic data base
                        solutions as possible. The new information systems replace in turn older,
                        mostly stand alone database applications. This is fortunate since it is
                        easier to create new interconnecting systems instead of connection old ones,
                        although technologies like the Z39.50 standard have open for relatively easy
                        interconnection of databases.
                    The system group has tried to think generically along two axis:
                            common interface tools and database functionality
                            common database solutions for common data types like geographical
                                data, bibliographical data, data about persons (legal and real),
                                classification systems in cultural and natural history and so
                                on
                        
                    During the model phase, the collections of each discipline has been described
                        as a set of different object types. We will here use a simplified model for
                        archaeology as an example. The collections of an archaeological museum
                        consist of artifacts, classification and acquisition catalogues, excavation
                        and conservation reports, photos and so on. We have modeled this as object
                        types such as:
                            a type of artifact objects
                            a type of finding circumstances (stray finds and excavation)
                                objects
                            a type of conservation objects
                            a transportation type
                        
                    The latter used to describe the movement of the artifacts inside and outside
                        of the museum and is shared with other museums and collections. Other shared
                        object types are persons, publications and geographical places (both natural
                        formations and abstract geographical entities like counties and
                        municipalities).
                    All the object types are implemented as relational databases in Oracle8i.
                        This is not an object oriented DBMS, but the object view of the data is
                        taken care of by a common meta database containing a subset of the data
                        model of each database (scheme). The user interface applications comes in
                        two version, one advanced version implemented in DELPHI5 and a somewhat
                        simpler WWW-interfaced based on plain HTML and Java-scripts. Both versions
                        use the information in the meta database to automatically create a user
                        adjustable search forms and result tables or grids. In the DELPHI5 version
                        each object type is also supplied with one or more object viewers presenting
                        the data connected to a given object. That is, by clicking on a line in the
                        grid of result, a more detailed view of the data is presented. In the photo
                        database a digital photo filing card with detailed information and a thumb
                        is presented. In a dictionary database a formatted entry will occur.
                    The second common feature of the system is the so called list module. The
                        visual metaphor is the ordinary file hierarchy with nested folders and
                        files. The "file icons" represent stored queries, hand compiled lists of
                        parts of one or many search result. A list can consist of objects of
                        different types, say, photos from a site, information about artifacts and
                        excavation reports. The folder hierarchy is used to systematize the lists.
                        The lists and the folders can be global, shared by a group or private. When
                        opened, a heterogeneous list will be presented as a collection of icons and
                        some basic information. Each element can be inspected by a viewer
                        corresponding to its object type. A list of objects of the same type can
                        also be seen as a result grid with a predefined layout.
                
                
                    Work with Sites and Monuments Records (SMR)
                    Norway has five archaeological museums. They are situated in Oslo, Bergen,
                        Trondheim, Troms¯ and Stavanger. With the exception of Stavanger, all are
                        university museums. Each museum has a collection of items from its own
                        district. Previously, however, the geographical division between the museums
                        was not so rigid, resulting in the different museums having artifacts from
                        other museum districts. The five archaeological museums have traditionally
                        had the responsibility of keeping and updating the SMR for their part of the
                        country. In 1993 the responsibility, but not the actual records, was
                        transfered to a central body, the Norwegian Institute for Cultural Heritage
                        Research (NIKU). In 1998 the Museum Project was asked to design and develop
                        a central database solution for a national SMR. The task was completed in
                        March 2000 and the national SRM database is now operating. The system is a
                        client-server solution based on Oracle and a client application developed in
                        Borland Delphi. In addition the SMR has a WWW interface used by local
                        authorities throughout the country. The SRM system is developed so that it
                        will be a seamless part of the information system which is the main
                        objectives of the Project. The WWW version will be demonstrated at the
                        conference.
                
                
                    Electronic exhibitions
                    Based on the digital collections we are building up, we have designed and
                        authored some electronic exhibitions: a folk music exhibition installed on
                        an ambulating Nordic exhibition celebrating a Queen Margerethe the first and
                        the so called Kalmar union (1397 a.d.) and a exhibition over Norwegian
                        coinage the last 1000 years originally used as an exhibition kiosk in the
                        exhibition hall at the University's Coin Collection. The original exhibition
                        contains video and sound which are excluded from the web-version due to
                        copyright limitations. An English version of this coinage exhibition is
                        available on the web and will be demonstrated at the conference.
                    The Museum project has also developed an image database for the photo
                        collections at the university museums, both for storing and cataloging
                        photos. The conversion and cataloging is an ongoing process for the next
                        decade. There are currently 110 000 images in the system. The web version of
                        this system will be available for demonstration.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        The project ran from 1992 to 1997, see .
                    
                
            
        
    
