


    
        
            
                Cultures and Literacies: South African students and
                    Western Visual design on the World Wide Web
                
                    
                        Marion
                        Walton
                        Multimedia Education Group University of Cape
                                Town
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        visual literacy
                        world wide web
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    How do user cultures and literacies affect the interpretation of Western
                        visual design on the World Wide Web? The rules of Western visual design (as
                        classified by Kress and van Leeuwen 1996) have become generally accepted as
                        the industry rules of thumb for both usability and aesthetic appeal on the
                        World Wide Web (see Nielsen 2000, Spool et al, Siegel 1996). The conventions
                        of Western visual design are widely used to signify information structure
                        and hierarchy and to facilitate navigation - following Kress, this could be
                        termed a "grammar of web design". On the affective level, the somewhat less
                        culturally specific conventions of visual language (as identified by Bonnici
                        1999) are widely used to create user identification with an increasingly
                        'branded' web.
                    Following Kress and Bonnici, this study codifies a grammar of Western web
                        design language, and report the responses of novice users from culturally
                        diverse backgrounds to a selection of key design conventions. Following the
                        approach of the New Literacy Studies, it is to be expected that users with
                        well-developed literacies in Western visual design will be advantaged and
                        consequently more successful in their transition to the web as medium. The
                        consequences of this lack of fit between web designs and the majority of
                        South African users' prior literacies is likely to have significant
                        implications in both the educational and general media contexts
                
                
                    Culture and web access in South Africa
                    Current understandings of South African web users and web user demographics
                        point to the vital importance of user identity in understanding web use. In
                        addition to user income, gender, age, race, and language have played
                        significant roles in limiting access to the web (Webcheck SA Web User
                        studies, MediaAfrica studies). Broadly speaking, addressing 'cultural'
                        issues will be crucial in extending real access to the web in South Africa
                        (rather than simply supplying infrastructure). Unfortunately, however, the
                        drive to broaden web access has focused primarily on the provision of
                        infrastructure in South Africa. This study focuses on novice web users, who
                        constitute 30% of the first year student intake in the Humanities at the
                        University of Cape Town.
                
                
                    Impoverished presentation values and the difficulties of establishing
                        cultural connections
                    The international web usability literature is not extremely helpful in
                        suggesting strategies to deal with this future demographic shift, neither is
                        the South African web industry adequately prepared for this challenge. Given
                        current demographics, the web industry has, of all South African media, been
                        least concerned with catering for a culturally diverse audience. Despite
                        accusations of racism, the South African media have, over the past decade,
                        become more diverse themselves, and more skilled at speaking to a broader
                        South African audience than they were in the apartheid era. Many of the
                        strategies that have been learned, are not, however, transferable to the
                        web. The web, to use Marshall McLuhan's terminology, is a 'hot' medium,
                        characterised by high interactivity. Consequently it requires a specialised
                        set of literacies which are not entirely transferable from broadcast or
                        print media. On the web, user engagement and involvement are governed by
                        very different factors.
                    In traditional media, presentation values have reigned supreme, and they play
                        a crucial role in manufacturing engagement and credibility. On the web,
                        however, the gratuitous use of rich media in a bandwidth-starved environment
                        has been a fundamental design flaw. On the other hand, without the full
                        power of image and sound, the media are deprived of the rich vocabulary they
                        have developed to convey culturally-inflected messages. On the web, new
                        vocabularies and new repertoires of communicative strategies need to be
                        developed which do not rely in the same way on rich media. This question has
                        not yet been studied to any significant degree, but it will be a crucial
                        determining factor in the uptake of the web in South Africa.
                
                
                    Prior knowledge, literacies, site navigation and searching
                    The major usability problem on the web relates to the characteristic
                        hypertextual disorientation of being 'lost in hyperspace' (first described
                        by Conklin,1987). Surprisingly large numbers of users cannot successfully
                        navigate sites or conduct fruitful searches. These users struggle to
                        construct coherence when interpreting both the text and navigational
                        conventions of a site. Sites are often poorly designed, and do not provide
                        adequate feedback, interaction or collaboration in the user's search for
                        meaning. Primarily, however, sites do not acknowledge the key role of
                        various literacies in determining the success of their users. When sites are
                        targeted at a broad spectrum of users, culturally and linguistically
                        speaking, this problem is intensified.
                    The active construction of coherence is vital to successful navigation of the
                        web. A user's construction of coherence depends on the existence of a
                        crucial set of well-developed prior knowledges. Users only experience web
                        sites as intuitively navigable when there is a close match between their
                        prior knowledge and that assumed by the designer of the site. The range of
                        literacies involved include but are not limited to:
                            Knowledge of formal written registers of language (primarily
                                English),
                            Experience in interpreting Western visual design and visual
                                language (Bonnici 1999, Kress and van Leeuwen 1996),
                            Knowledge of web and GUI (Graphical User Interface)
                                conventions,
                            Domain knowledge.
                        
                    
                
                
                    Approach
                    Recent tendencies in the study of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) have
                        illustrated the limited value of laboratory studies based on a narrow
                        cognitive science approach. This study will draw on new paradigms of
                        research in HCI, which acknowledge that human activity is situated in both a
                        cultural and physical context. The insights of activity theory, in
                        particular, will form the major theoretical grounding of the study. In
                        approaches influenced by activity theory, the focus shifts from a narrow
                        view of humans interacting with computers, to a broader interest in human
                        activity, as mediated by computers (e.g. Nardi 1996).
                    In line with the activity theory approach, field studies have been conducted
                        to observe the web behaviour of 40 first year students.
                    Once they are given access to the internet, people still need the capacity to
                        know what information they want or need, where to find it, and then what to
                        do with it. So far, the South African web industry has ignored this issue.
                        Without a clearer understanding of how to engage a broader cross-section of
                        South Africans in internet use, we will not be able to address the challenge
                        of providing meaningful web resources once people have access.
                    Unfortunately, however, the role of culture and literacy in users'
                        interpretation of the web has been addressed at a rather superficial level
                        in existing studies of usability on the web. These studies tend to originate
                        from a concern with the export of software to culturally different contexts,
                        and consequently focus on the relatively crude practicalities of
                        "internationalisation" and "regionalisation". The issue of "culture" is
                        receiving an increasing amount of attention from the local CHI (Computer
                        Human Interaction) community in South Africa with some excellent theoretical
                        descriptions of the challenges in the field (e.g. Jackson and Lalioti 2000).
                        While this is an exciting development, it is important to guard against
                        approaches which unintentionally reduce culture into a reified social force
                        or homogenized national frame of mind. Given South Africa's history, this
                        stereotyped notion of culture (however well-meaning in intent) can be
                        problematic.
                    In contrast to this approach, important insights into the cultural and
                        literacy factors which influence usability could be gained through adopting
                        the methods of anthropologist Clifford Geertz. Geertz's "semiotic" view
                        understands culture as the frames of meaning actively woven as people live
                        their lives: 
                            "culture is not a power, something to which social events,
                                behaviours, institutions, or processes can be causally attributed;
                                it is a context"
                            (14).
                        
                    This study applies the more complex ethnographic methods of cultural analysis
                        in its report on South African students' interaction with visual design on
                        the World Wide Web.
                
                
                    Field studies of users
                    A culturally diverse group of students entering tertiary institutions
                        provides an interesting snapshot of the South Africa's future web users.
                        Field studies have been conducted, consisting of user observations,
                        interviews and bookmark walkthroughs. The following issues have received
                            attention:
                            How is the grammar of Western visual design (Kress) manifest in
                                the conventions of web design?
                            How do users' visual literacy in Western design relate to their
                                success in navigational and searching tasks?
                            Are there any key conventions which exert disproportionate
                                influence on user success?
                            How does experience in interpreting Western visual design, relate
                                to successful navigation?
                            How quickly and completely are knowledge of web and GUI
                                conventions acquired?
                            What is the role of visual literacy in the construction of
                                coherence on the web?
                        
                
            
        
    
