


    
        
            
                Technical aspects of the production process of digital
                    books using XML-TEI at the Miguel de Cervantes digital library
                
                    
                        Alejandro
                        Bia
                        Miguel de Cervantes Digital Library, University of Alicante
                            abia@dlsi.ua.es
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            

                
                    
                        digital libraries
                        markup
                        workflow
                    
                
            
        

    
    
        
            
                
                    We describe the digital-book production process followed at the Miguel de
                        Cervantes Digital Library, from book acquisition up to Internet publishing,
                        highlighting the main requirements and design considerations of the workflow
                        system.
                    Our library covers many different areas, from a "library of voices" up to
                        academic thesis and it includes all kinds of multimedia material: text,
                        images, audio and video. However, the vast majority of our resources are in
                        text format. These are our 4000 digital books, public domain Hispanic
                        classics, from the twelfth century up to these days, including narrative,
                        theater, poetry, history and other subjects. Many professionals and
                        technicians take part in the development of our digital books: librarians,
                        scanner operators, correctors, markup specialists and computer technicians.
                        The poster describes the production process of the digital books and allows
                        the discussion of markup issues concerning our approach using XML-TEI
                        encoding.
                    
                        Architecture of the digital-book production process
                    
                    The production process begins with a bibliographic search to find interesting
                        available books to digitize. After selecting new literary works to add to
                        the collection, the librarians elaborate the orders to be sent to various
                        sources (conventional libraries, bookstores, publishers, private collectors
                        in the case of rare books, etc.).
                    Bibliographic information associated to each book is stored into a catalogue
                        database This information is used for many purposes: it helps in the control
                        of both the production process and the publication process, it allows
                        catalogue searches, and is provided to the readers in the form of a digital
                        bibliographic card accessible through the Internet.
                    The source physical books and the produced digital books do not always relate
                        in a one-to-one basis. In some cases, a physical book will give birth to
                        many digital books as is the case of collections or "complete works" that
                        may be split into several digital books (In a DL there is no reason to group
                        different literary works as it is done on a printed book, since the criteria
                        used for traditional books do not apply to their digital siblings. However,
                        there are exceptions. Literary experts may decide to group poems from
                        different collections into a single digital book.). Titles may differ also
                        since some works are known by many titles according to different editions. 
                    Upon reception, the books are cataloged. Information like subject, authors
                        and collaborators, universal decimal classification and search keys that
                        will simplify the location and retrieval of the books is stored in a
                        database. At this point, the production process begins. The librarians mark
                        the received source titles as available for processing and a unique code
                        that will identify the d-book permanently is assigned. This code is used
                        within the workflow system, and also in the names of all the files related
                        to the book (during production and also for publication purposes).
                    At every stage of the production process start and end date-time information
                        is recorded along with the operator identification for follow up and
                        production control purposes. At any time, the librarians can access the
                        records of the d-books under development to modify bibliographic-catalogue
                        information.
                    The resulting output of the scanning process is a set of files of two
                        classes: first, scanned images, and then optical character recognition
                        (OCR), text documents. The former are stored in backup media for future
                        projects. The latter, after an automatic error recovery process, are passed
                        to the correction stage.
                    At quality control, if too many errors are detected, measures are taken to
                        adjust the scanning-OCR process to improve the resulting output, since a
                        high rate of mistakes rise the time-cost of the rest of the process.
                    As our library handles books of many centuries of Hispanic literature
                        (including Spanish, Catalan and Galician languages), peculiar problems arise
                        which are not trivial, like the spell-checking of ancient writings. Projects
                        to tackle this time-dynamics of language are being carried out by our
                        research team.
                
                
                    Correction
                    The next stage is correction, where specialists in literature, history and
                        linguistics use a text editor to correct not only OCR errors but also
                        mistakes in the original publication, sometimes making side-by-side
                        comparisons among different editions.
                    Although some works of long extension, may be fragmented to facilitate the
                        correction task, it is desirable that a single person corrects each book, to
                        take advantage of the specialized knowledge she/he acquires during the
                        correction process of its contents and its peculiarities.
                    If the work was fragmented for correction, the markup operator joins the
                        fragments. It is also advisable that the markup be accomplished by the same
                        person that performed the correction, due to her/his familiarity with the
                        contents, but sometimes a different highly skilled markup specialist may be
                        preferred. So the system was designed to allow flexibility of task
                        assignment.
                
                
                    Markup
                    Markup, consists of applying marks that describe the structure of the
                        documents, and also marks that indicate how the digital book should be built
                        later. These marks are concerned with index inclusion, chapter
                        fragmentation, hypertext linking and graphics insertion, among others.
                    One of our goals is to automate the markup process as much as possible. In
                        this sense, we have built parsing programs to convert documents from the two
                        major commercial text editors to TEI-XML, making use of the style
                        information to locate headings, deduct division borders, add TEI paragraph
                        marks, as well as &lt;text&gt;, &lt;front&gt; and &lt;body&gt; marks. The
                        result is an almost valid XML document, whose markup must be corrected and
                        completed. The markup effort is reduced substantially in this way, since the
                        most common tags like &lt;p&gt; are automatically added. Partial markup
                        processes like these save time, since they add the most common markers, and
                        generate almost-always valid (or valid with a few corrections) XML documents
                        to start with.
                    After markup, documents undergo a final revision before being passed to the
                        following stages. Documents that pass this check are considered final
                        products, and are preserved and backed-up accordingly.
                    From this point on, processing is automatic, and although we now generate a
                        few publishing formats, we expect to generate many more based on these
                        revised corrected marked-up files.
                    
                        Generation of different file formats from XML-TEI
                    
                
                
                    Generation and publishing
                    Finally, the digital book generation stage is a fully automated process where
                        marked-up XML-TEI files are processed by a parsing program that produces
                        HTML digital book files ready for immediate Internet publishing.
                    The use of templates allows us to generate different sets of books with the
                        same look and functionality within a given set, and a different look and
                        functionality for other sets. We use this approach to maintain several
                        different portals of the same digital library: the original one, Miguel de
                        Cervantes with books in Spanish language, the Joan Lluis Vives with books in
                        Catalan language, and many others.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Lou
                                    Burnard
                                
                            
                            Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange
                                (Text Encoding Initiative P3)
                            Revised Reprint, Oxford, May 1999
                            
                                Chicago - Oxford
                                Text Encoding Initiative
                                May 1994
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Alejandro
                                    Bia
                            Andrés
                                    Pedreño
                            The Miguel de Cervantes Digital Library: The Hispanic
                                Voice on the WEB
                        
                        
                            Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                (to be published soon)
                            
                        
                        Presented at ALLC/ACH 2000, The Joint International Conference of the
                            Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing and the Association
                            for Computers and the humanities, 21/25 July 2000, University of
                            Glasgow.
                    
                    
                        
                            M.
                                    Lousa
                            A.
                                    Sarmento
                            A.
                                    Machado
                            Expectations towards the adoption of workflow systems:
                                the results of a case study 
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on
                                Groupware: CRIWG 2000
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
