


    
        
            
                 What can Hyperplane-Classifiers tell us about
                    Texts?
                
                    
                        Edda
                        Leopold
                        
                            GMD German National Research Center for Information
                                Technology
                            Institute for Autonomous intelligent Systems
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jörg
                        Kindermann
                        
                            GMD German National Research Center for Information
                                Technology
                            Institute for Autonomous intelligent Systems
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            

                
                    
                        vector space representation
                        text classification
                         
                    
                
            
        

    
    
        
            
                We want to report from our results with Support Vector Machines for Text
                    Classification in order to promote the interdisciplinary dialogue. Our research
                    group consists mainly of statisticians and computer-scientists, and focusses on
                    the algorithmic side of text-classifica-tion. We want to discuss our experiences
                    with researchers working on other fields of linguistic computing and ask for the
                    implications of our results on linguistic approaches which use vector space
                    representations as for example "semantic spaces" and "latent semantic
                    indexing".
                The algorithm called "Support Vector Machines", can shortly be described as
                    follows (A more detailed description can be found in (Vapnik 1998)):
                        1 A set of labeled documents is needed for training. Documents are
                            mapped to their type-frequency vectors. These vectors span an high
                            dimensional input space (every type represents one dimension). This kind
                            of abstraction from syntagmatic structures is often refered to as
                            "bag-of-words" approach.
                        2. The algorithm searches for a hyperplane in input space which
                            optimally separates the training documents.
                        3. Documents of a test-set are attributed to one of the classes
                            depending on the side of the hyperplane they are located on. SVM have
                            proven to provide an effective means for text classification on
                            different languages (English and German) and textual domains (English
                            Reuters news; Ohsumed medical abstracts, e-mail newsgroups; German:
                            newspapers taz, FR, BZ, e-mail newsgroups) and different tasks (topic
                            identification, Authorship attribution, classification according
                            newspaper issues of different years). (Joachims 1997; Joachims1998;
                            Drucker et al.; Dumais et al. 1998; Diederich &amp; Kindermann &amp;
                            Leopold &amp; Paaþ 2000; Leopold &amp; Kindermann 2001)
                    
                
                The great advantage of SVMs is, that they can manage a very large number of
                    attributes (in our experiments we have worked with up to half a million
                    attributes), given that the attribute vectors are sparse. This makes it possible
                    to perform document-classification directly on the frequency spectra of
                    documents without any kind of feature selection. This is why we think that
                    results on the precision/recall performance of Support Vector Machines can be
                    interpreted as statements about frequency spectra of document collections, and
                    thus constitute a kind of linguistic evidence.
                Another advantage of SVMs is, that various kernel functions can be used. Kernel
                    functions correspond to a mapping of input vectors to a even higer dimensional
                    feature space and can heuristically interpreted as different geometries in input
                    space ((hyper)planes may be substituted by e.g. (hyper)spheres).
                The choice of the kernel function is crucial to most applications of support
                    vector machines. However in the case of text-classification Kernel functions
                    only slightly affect performance although they imply completely different
                    geometries of input space. So from the stand point of retrieval performance it
                    is nearly irrelevant if topic-boundaries are defined by planes or by
                    spheres.
                What does this mean for the bag-of-words approach which represents documents in
                    the form of type frequency vectors, and what does it mean for the quality of
                    co-occurrence of types within the context of a document? We will try to give an
                    answer in terms of stochastical dependency of types.
                Another observation we made is that lemmatization does not affect performance in
                    terms of precision and recall. In English our results on the Reuters news corpus
                    obtained without any linguistic preprocessing do not differ significantly from
                    those obtained by Joachims (1998) who has used the Porter stemmer. In German
                    lemmatization also did not yield an improovement of performance, which is
                    surprising because of the morphological richness of German. However our results
                    agree with those obtained with neural nets in French news data (Stricker 2000),
                    neural nets however need a reduction of dimensionality as opposed to SVM. An
                    explanation of this finding is that lemmatization leads loss of information,
                    because different word forms are mapped to the same lemma. A surprising result,
                    is that author identification is also best done on the bases of word-forms
                    rather than on the basis of bigramms of grammatical tags.
                We are currently working multi-class classification using Support Vector Machines
                    (Kindermann et al 2000). The problem here is to group the classes of documents
                    in an appropriate way. To this end we explore the inter- and intra-class
                    distance of type-frequency distributions.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            Joachim
                                    Diederich
                            Jörg
                                    Kindermann
                            Edda
                                    Leopold
                            Gerhard
                                    Paaß
                            Authorship Attribution with Support Vector
                                Machines
                        
                        
                            Poster presented at The Learning Workshop; 4 - 7 April,
                                2000 in Snowbird, Utah
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            H.
                                    Drucker
                            D.
                                    Wu
                            V.
                                    Vapnik
                            Support vector machines for spam categorization
                        
                        
                            IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
                            
                                10
                                5
                                1048-1054
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Susan
                                    Dumais
                            John
                                    Platt
                            David
                                    Heckerman
                            Mehran
                                    Sahami
                            Inductive Learning Algorithms and Representations for
                                Text Categorization
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of ACM-CIKM-98; 7th International
                                Conference on Information Retrieval and Knowledge Management
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                                148--155
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Thorsten
                                    Joachims
                                
                            
                            Text categorization with support vector machines:
                                learning with many relevant features
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of ECML-98, 10th European Conference on
                                Machine Learning
                            Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Number 1398
                            
                                Heidelberg, DE
                                Springer Verlag
                                1998
                                137-142
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Jörg
                                    Kindermann
                            Edda
                                    Leopold
                            Gerhard
                                    Paaß
                            Multiclass Classification with Error Correcting
                                Codes
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Edda
                                    Leopold
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Mathias
                                    Kirsten
                                
                            
                             Treffen der GI-Fachgruppe 1.1.3 Maschinelles
                                Lernen
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                                56-64
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Edda
                                    Leopold
                            Jörg
                                    Kindermann
                            Text Categorization with Support Vector Machines. How
                                to Represent Texts in Input Space?
                        
                        
                            Machine Learning
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                accepted for publication
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            M.Stricker
                            Réseaux de neurones pour le traitement automatique du
                                langage : conception et réalisatiion de filtres
                                d'informations
                        
                        
                            Thèse de Doctorat de l'Université Pierre et Marie Curie - Paris
                                VI
                            
                                School of Library, Archive and Information Studies,
                                    University College London
                                200
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Vladimir
                                    Vapnik
                                
                            
                            Statistical Learning Theory
                            
                                
                                Wiley &amp; sons
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
