


    
        
            
                Job Seeking in Humanities Computing 
                
                    
                        Julia
                        Flanders
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Lorna
                        Hughes
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Matthew
                        Kirschenbaum
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Wendell
                        Piez
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Geoffrey
                        Rockwell
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                 
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            

                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        

    
    
        
            
                Interested in a job in humanities computing? Wondering where to find jobs in the
                    field and what qualifications employers are looking for? The Job Seeking
                    committee of the ACH has compiled an analytic collection of academic and
                    industry job ads in the field. In this poster we will walk you through typical
                    job ads commenting on the skills and knowledge expected in the field. We will
                    present the following:
                        1. Information on where to look for jobs.
                        2. Examples of jobs across the academy and industry.
                        3. Commentary on how these ads are written and the qualifications
                            needed for such jobs.
                        4. Suggestion on how to learn the skills you need and how to document
                            that when applying for jobs.
                        5. Connection to mentors who can confidentially review your CV in
                            light of the types of humanities computing jobs you are interested
                            in.
                    
                
                This poster session is a chance to meet faculty and project administrators who
                    have experience hiring in the field to learn about how they write ads and what
                    they are looking for. It is an opportunity to think through the career you might
                    pursue in humanities computing.
            
        
    
