


    
        
            
                Form or Function: Considerations in Presenting
                    Historical Documents on the Web
                
                    
                        Cokie
                        Anderson
                        
                            Oklahoma State University Library Digitization
                                Center
                            cokie@okstate.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Julia
                        Crawford
                        
                            Oklahoma State University Library Digitization
                                Center
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            

                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        

    
    
        
            
                When the OSU Library began its digitization program, the first work chosen for
                    digitization was Indian Affairs: Laws and Treaties, a
                    multi-volume collection of all U.S. laws and treaties dealing with Native
                    American tribes edited by Charles Kappler and published by the US GPO in 1913. A
                    key reason for choosing this item, in addition to high demand for it and its
                    limited availability, was its unique appearance and features. Mr. Kappler, in
                    addition to collecting all the laws treaties, added marginalia which is of great
                    assistance to researchers. The marginalia is not editorial comment, but selected
                    keywords indicating the subject matter of the passage and citations to related
                    legal materials. A researcher can scan the marginalia to find the portion of the
                    treaty or statute that deals with the subject in which he or she is interested
                    or to get a quick overview of all matters covered in that particular treaty or
                    law. A chief objective of the initial phase of the project was to preserve the
                    appearance of this feature in the web version. In 1996, when this project began,
                    web technology was fairly new and its possibilities were not yet fully
                    appreciated. The project team was focused on preserving the appearance of the
                    document, i.e., the marginalia literally in the margin next to the text. Grant
                    funding was obtained for this purpose. Much time and effort was expended to
                    acieve this goal, but nothing worked satisfactorily. The use of frames was
                    considered, but was ruled out because of their limited browser compatibility at
                    the time, and the hurdles they posed for the disabled user. In the end, it was
                    decided to place all margin notes at the beginning of the document with links to
                    the relevant passage so they could serve their original purpose as an overview
                    and browsing tool for the researcher. To preserve for the user the unique look
                    of the original , links to JPEG images of the book pages are provided at the top
                    of each treaty. In the second phase of the project, the site architecture was
                    redesigned to provide access to the text and page images from a variety of
                    points. The margin notes are again presented at the beginning of each document,
                    but this time in a table format that not only provides the text of the
                    marginalia but also indicates the section of the statute to which the marginalia
                    occurs. This gives the researcher a better sense of context for the notes. The
                    text hyperlinks to the exact place in the main document where the marginalia
                    appears in the book. JPEG images of the book pages may be accessed from a
                    referral link at the top of each document, and from links at each page break
                    throughout the document. Both form and function are thus preserved.
            
        
    
