


    
        
            
                Sharing expertise in the use of information and
                    communication technology to enhance teaching and learning in the
                    humanities
                
                    
                        Frances
                        Condron
                        Humanities Computing Unit University of
                                Oxford
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Helen
                        Beetham
                        Faculty of Education and Language Studies The
                                Open University
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Catherine
                        Bennett
                        Dept of Psychology University of York
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Peter
                        Twining
                        Faculty of Education and Language Studies The
                                Open University
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            

                
                    
                        humanities
                        digital library
                        education
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    The ASTER project (Assisting Small-group Teaching through Electronic
                        Resources) is a collaboration between the universities of Oxford, Surrey and
                        York (lead site), and University College Northampton. It is funded by the
                        Higher Education Funding Council for England, through the Teaching and
                        Learning Technology Programme phase 3. Since autumn 1998, ASTER has been
                        exploring how new technologies can support staff and students to make better
                        use of small-group teaching, be it as tutorials, seminars, workshops,
                        laboratories or other practical classes. This demonstration will introduce
                        two aspects of ASTER's work:
                            1. Findings from the survey of the use of information and
                                communication technologies to support small group teaching in a
                                range of humanities and other disciplines.
                            2. ASTER's collaboration with other projects in the UK to create a
                                prototype digital library of case studies.
                        
                
                
                    1. The ASTER survey ()
                    In 1999, ASTER undertook a series of surveys in UK higher education
                        institutions to identify good practice in the use of new technologies for
                        small-group teaching. We were interested in the tools and resources being
                        used, and the contextual factors which determine the success or otherwise of
                        implementing new technologies in teaching and learning. Another key issue
                        was to identify disciplinary differences, and to explore why these came
                        about. A questionnaire was sent out by email to thousands of academics in
                        Britain and beyond; 40 academics were interviewed by telephone; 30 case
                        studies were carried out in 1999 and 2000. The case studies cover a range of
                        subjects: archaeology, art, chemistry, classics, engineering, english,
                        mathematics, physics, psychology, theology. The case studies and reports
                        from the surveys are available from the ASTER Web site ().
                    Findings show that a range of C&amp;IT tools is being used before, within,
                        and after classes, to support and enhance dialogue between students and
                        tutors. Moreover, there are disciplinary differences in the choice of tools
                        used to support teaching and learning. While some digital resources act as a
                        medium through which dialogue occurs (communication tools such as email,
                        chat and discussion lists), the majority of the ASTER case studies document
                        indirect support. Computer-mediated communication, and the communications
                        features of virtual learning environments, directly support dialogue, and
                        are popular in the arts, humanities, and psychology, though ASTER found
                        minimal use by physicists and chemists. Multimedia tutorials (often
                        providing introductions to subjects) and simulations, where available, can
                        ensure that students have sufficient skills to continue with the course -
                        thus they are popular in physics and engineering, covering mathematics;
                        language drillers are used to support vocabulary acquisition and grammar,
                        but not widely used in English literature or fine art, for example. The
                        ASTER survey found that students were directed to multimedia tutorials for
                        independent study, freeing up face-to-face meetings for more advanced
                        discussion. Finally, preparatory readings may be accessed via the Web,
                        through a Virtual Learning Environment, or on CD-ROM. Such resources offer
                        limited support for dialogue, though they are popular in the arts,
                        humanities and psychology (and presumably the social sciences); limited use
                        was made of such resources to support undergraduate teaching in the physical
                        sciences.
                    These differences in the use of new technologies to support small-group
                        teaching are a result of several interconnecting factors. An obvious reason
                        is that the subject content of any resource needs to fit the course being
                        taught, and digital resources are not currently available to cover all
                        university courses! However, we found that other factors are at play.
                        Discussion classes are vital to support students' acquisition of subject
                        expertise and jargon, and to engage in academic discourse, both verbal and
                        written. However, opportunities for discussion between students and tutors
                        are reliant on the balance of teaching methods used (lectures, practicals,
                        seminars etc.), and class size, both of which vary between disciplines and
                        institutions. Electronic tools can support discussion, mediating between
                        individuals, though previous experience in using tools either for research
                        or teaching by students and tutors influences their perception of the value
                        of these tools.
                    The ASTER project attempts to pull together these areas of research in
                        teaching practice and the use of new technologies. While the ASTER survey
                        has not been able to gather information on teaching practices across entire
                        institutions, or nationally for all departments in a given subject area, it
                        has nevertheless revealed differences in teaching practices between
                        disciplines. These differences are not clear cut, the number of ASTER case
                        studies is relatively small, and our findings cannot be taken as
                        representative of UK higher education as a whole. However, they raise issues
                        that deserve further attention (ASTER 2000 and Condron 2001 discuss the
                        findings in more detail).
                
                
                    2. Sharing expertise: the prototype digital library of case studies ()
                    One of the many problems facing those involved in making effective use of new
                        technologies in education is locating relevant information that can support
                        and enhance their endeavours and avoid duplication of effort. This is
                        particularly problematic in the area of new technology for a number of
                        reasons, including: the rapid rate of change of technology; the vast amount
                        of work taking place in the area; and the lack of adequate co-ordination of
                        information between the different organisations, institutions and
                        individuals involved.
                    The higher education funding councils of the UK have spent millions of pounds
                        on supporting staff development, through special units within institutions,
                        and research and dissemination projects such as the Teaching and Learning
                        Technology Programme (TLTP), the Forum for the Development of Teaching and
                        Learning (FDTL), and the Learning and Teaching Support Network (LTSN). These
                        programmes all support fixed-term projects. Such projects aim to disseminate
                        their findings and resources, and have an impact on higher education
                        practice within the limits of their funding, at least in part because these
                        are often measures against which their success is judged. In many ways,
                        projects are competing with each other to raise their individual profiles,
                        so that they are seen to be successful and are thus more likely to attract
                        further funding. For the user community, keeping informed of current
                        developments is challenging - there is currently no central service
                        coordinating the sharing of information between projects and the academic
                        community.
                    In order to start to support the user community more effectively, four TLTP
                        projects (all UK-based) came together in spring 2000 to develop a model for
                        supporting access to our case studies of teaching practice (the projects are
                            ASTER, EFFECTS, SoURCE, and TALENT). We ended up with a
                        model of a central service for staff development. This model was based on
                        the results of a national survey of staff developers, and a prototype
                        digital library of case studies on the use of information and communication
                        technologies in teaching and learning. As TLTP projects, we share a common
                        focus on learning technologies, though our model of a central service covers
                        higher education in general. Our projects are due for completion in autumn
                        2001, and no service is yet in place to archive and disseminate our tools
                        and resources after closure.
                    The prototype digital library that we have established consists of a central
                        database containing only descriptions of the case studies, and a
                        user-friendly interface. The case studies themselves remain on the server of
                        the project that created them. This simple description glosses over the
                        effort that went into creating the database - we saw the need to follow
                        international standards from the start, to support sharing of information
                        and use of common terminology. Case studies were described using metadata
                        (inspired by the Gateway to Educational Materials - GEM - in the USA)
                        populated with vocabularies drawn from the Thesaurus of ERIC Descriptors
                        (educational terms). Further work is taking place to map terms across
                        various current national and international educational thesauri. The
                        original database is driven by Apple's Global Object Economy, but in
                        extending the metadata and technical interoperability standards we are
                        porting it to an SQL database.
                    The design of the user interface was the result of lengthy research. We ran a
                        national survey which helped us to identify four key groups of potential
                        users of a central library. This resulted in the design of four access
                        routes, aimed at academics (focussed on their subject), staff developers
                        (focussed on pedagogy), educational developers (concerned with technology)
                        and senior managers (with interests in strategy). Controlled vocabularies
                        were developed for each of these categories, and used to catalogue case
                        studies. An individual case study could contain information relevant to one
                        or more of the categories.
                    The process of designing a digital library of case studies highlighted the
                        need for projects to retain ownership of their work, both so that a user of
                        the database can recognise that the case studies it holds are the result of
                        diverse working practices, and for the projects to retain their visibility
                        and independent profile. This need for projects to have a high profile is
                        one of the greatest barriers to collaborations of this sort. It was overcome
                        by enabling each project to maintain its own customised Web interface to the
                        one shared database. In addition, the process of vocabulary development has
                        highlighted important areas of debate in understanding features of the
                        learning environment and learning interactions. Further research in this
                        area is clearly essential.
                
            
        
        
            
                References:
                
                    
                        
                            
                                ASTER
                            
                            Investigating the Use of Electronic Resources in
                                Small-Group Learning and Teaching
                            
                                York
                                ASTER
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            F.
                                    Condron
                            Using electronic resources to support dialogue in
                                undergraduate small-group teaching: the ASTER project
                        
                        
                            ALT-J - Association for Learning Technology
                                Journal
                            
                                9
                                2
                                39-46
                                (forthcoming)
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                URLs:
                ASTER (Assisting Small-group Teaching through Electronic Resources) 
                EFFECTS (Effective Frameworks For Embedding C&amp;IT with Targetted Support)
                        
                SoURCE (Software Use, Re-use and Customisation in Education) 
                TALENT (Teaching and Learning with Network Technologies) 
            
        
    
