


    
        
            
                Remote Interactive Animated Projection
                
                    
                        Robert
                        Hamilton
                        School for the Arts McMaster University
                            hamiltr@mcmaster.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        Remote
                        Interactive
                        Animation
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction:
                    A joint art based project that explores Remote Interactive Animated
                        Projections has been initiated between the Humanities Computing Department
                        of McMaster University and the Multimedia department of The School of the
                        Arts, also of McMaster University. The project will utilize a newly funded
                        video streaming facility that is currently being organized by the Humanities
                        Computing department to facilitate faculty research. The Remote Interactive
                        Animated Projection Project is being initiated in part to foster
                        interdisciplinary research between The School of the Arts and The Humanities
                        Computing Department.
                    The content of the work will largely be animation based. The content will be
                        generated in advance of the actual installation. Animation was chosen as an
                        art form because of its flexible nature and the relative ease in which it
                        can be digitized. Animation allows for a dynamic projection of inner
                        thoughts and ideas that are at best difficult to render in any other way.
                        Animation is often derived from abstract thought. At times there is a
                        struggle to simulate aspects of the world as experienced by an artist. In
                        this way, much like a draughtsman, the work becomes a distilled thought: a
                        studied observation. An observation that is somehow greater in its sum than
                        that of a photograph. In this way, one could suggest that animation is able
                        to express a remediation of how images are perceived.
                    One seductive aspect of animation is production time is usually lengthy and
                        anything but "instant." Production is slow and meticulous. At times the work
                        can be quite tedious. A thousand ideas come and go as while progressing
                        image by image. Ones mind wanders and the subconscious seems to permit
                        unusual thoughts to float to the top. New ideas and connections arise. In
                        its creation, animation seems to encourage lateral thinking; an intuitive
                        thought process. Suppressed thoughts gain currency and come to the
                        forefront. It is no wonder that some of the most inspired examples of
                        animation are strangely surreal and occasionally frightening. Examples would
                        be the work of Jan Svankmajer, The Brothers Quay or more recently; various
                        clips in the recent feature film The Fight Club: the animism of familiar
                        objects.
                    The Remote Interactive Animation project attempts to bridge artifice with
                        reality. The project investigated the creative application of interactive
                        media within an environment that would normally not be associated with
                        external media of any form. An example of this would is the potential of a
                        suburban neighborhood and itís track housing. To intrude upon this
                        environment presents many possibilities. The project will convert picture
                        windows in the front of a houses in to a large video screens that randomly
                        generate narratives which are triggered according to the movements or
                        reaction of the people passing on the street. The images would be streamed
                        from a central server directly from the University.
                
                
                    Streaming Video: New Potential for Expression
                    To augment existing structures and concepts within a community is to address
                        the possibility of integration or introduction of new media to an
                        environment that otherwise would not be deemed appropriate. The concern is
                        to conform media to an actual pre-existing neighborhood. The reason for this
                        is two-fold: to initiate interest in new media and animation within the
                        community and secondly, to explore and augment existing forms of community
                        communications.
                    In relation to existing forms of communication within a given community such
                        as television, the introduction of interactivity has begun to radically
                        alter the relationship between transmitter and audience. No longer passive
                        yet not entirely empowered, the audience has yet to determine the exact
                        nature of interactive communication.
                    An additional purpose is to explore the territory of media interface and
                        display. Although computers are excellent at creating and/or organizing the
                        content of media, they are not always the best suited to displaying the
                        results. This is a major concern: to free media from the confines of a
                        desktop computer. The goal is to augment an existent display system that
                        recreates interactive elements found in a computer terminal but within a new
                        context. In addition, the entire system will be portable, allowing for easy
                        transport and installation.
                
                
                    Implementation
                    Essentially, the project consists of streaming video from a central server of
                        animated figures through a portable projection system in a public space.
                        Viewers may influence the projection through body movement or other
                        criteria. The interactive projection is a viable means for creating a rich
                        experience for the viewer.
                
                
                    Conclusion
                    The Remote Interactive Animation Project is a work in process that will
                        evolve over the duration of approximately one year. The project will should
                        wrap-up by December 2001. The results of the research will be documented and
                        organized in to an online site. Anticipated results include the
                        dissemination of fine art based projects in both the immediate community and
                        abroad, expanding the potential sphere of presentation for art based
                        projects and the implementation of technology that will offer interactivity
                        with media at broadband speed.
                
            
        
    
