


    
        
            
                Phraseological Database Extended by Educational
                    Material for Learning Scientific Style
                
                    
                        Elena
                        I.
                        Bolshakova
                        Center of Computer Investigations (CIC), National Polytechnic Institute (IPN), Mexico City, Mexico
                                elena@pollux.cic.ipn.mx
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2001
                
                    New York University
                
                New York, NY
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Literary styles, as well as specialized sublanguages, accomplishing
                        communicative goals in particular fields of human activity, share main
                        features of natural language as a whole, and at the same time demonstrates
                        some deviations from it, with respect to their syntax, morphology, and
                        lexicon (Grishman and Kittredge 1986). As a rule, each functional style has
                        its own phraseology, i.e. a system of word stereotypes (cliche) exploited as
                        stable colloquial formulas that are ready for use and thus optimize
                        communication. 
                    Among the others, the functional style of scientific and technical (sci-tech)
                        prose is admittedly the most distinctive one, primarily due to the intensive
                        use of scientific phraseology including special sci-tech terms (Mitrofanova
                        1973). The style covers documents of various genres and particular types -
                        manual, research paper, technical report, instructions, patents, etc.
                        Scientific phraseology provides economical ways to express ideas in sci-tech
                        texts with their factuality, informativeness, and precision.
                    Teaching and learning literary styles is of great importance not only for
                        students in the humanities, but also for students in technical and natural
                        sciences. Student's competence in particular fields should be supplemented
                        with the ability to write sci-tech documents of a sufficiently high quality.
                        Thus, education in technical and natural sciences should include some
                        humanity knowledge, in particular, knowledge of scientific style.
                    Phraseology of specialized scientific sublanguages includes both sci-tech
                        terms and the common scientific phraseology. Acquiring the latter presents
                        the major difficulty in learning scientific style, because terms can be
                        usually found in specialized dictionaries, while there are few available
                        dictionaries of typical scientific phraseological expressions. However,
                        students need certain educational information or/and an assistant system for
                        acquiring scientific phraseology.
                    We describe a computer system being under development over a period of two
                        years and integrating phraseological database of Russian scientific language
                        and explanatory educational material. It is intended to help students to
                        improve their linguistic competence in the scientific style and genres and
                        belongs to hybrid computer systems supporting both process of sci-tech
                        writing and learning its fundamentals. Another example of such hybrid
                        systems is an experimental system described in (Bolshakova 2000). While
                        designing the phraseology database, the principles of several computer
                        lexical databases were considered (Fellbaum 1998, Bolshakov 1994).
                
                
                    Features of the System
                    >From the user's point of view, the system can be regarded as a linguistic
                        database supplied with a computer reference guide accumulating general
                        explanatory information about scientific style and phraseology. Text of the
                        guide has been specially written and structured for representation in
                        hypertext form, since usefulness of hypertext for learning is well
                        acknowledged (Brusilovsky 1996).
                    Thus, each page of the reference guide presents a relatively independent
                        topic and is connected by hypertext links with another pages of the guide
                        and pages presenting items of the phraseology database. In turn, hypertext
                        pages with phraseological expressions are both interconnected and connected
                        with guide pages explaining necessary concepts. Besides browsing through
                        various pages, the search of phraseological expressions containing fixed
                        words can be made, resulting in a relevant page.
                    The system is flexibly organized: it allow a free navigation through pages of
                        the reference guide and of the phraseological database, thus enabling to
                        view the information in a desirable sequence. At the same time, a student
                        can learn the educational material in a predetermined systemic way
                        recommended for beginners. Such flexibility envisioned by a liberal
                        humanities viewpoint proved to be more effective learning strategy.
                
                
                    Covered Phraseology
                    Phraseology represented in the database was gathered from several textual
                        dictionaries of common scientific phraseology - see, for example, (DICT
                        1973) and then complemented by phraseological data obtained through manual
                        scanning of scientific texts in several fields.
                    Units of common scientific phraseology, including domain independent word
                        stereotypes and colloquial templates specific for particular scientific
                        genres, was systemized and arranged according to their functions in texts.
                        The biggest group of expressions concerns words regarded as common
                        scientific variables, e.g. "problem", "analysis", "result". For instance,
                        phraseological expressions with such variables are: "objective analysis
                        shows/yields ", "to question the results". Another group presents units of
                        metatext character, designing and organizing scientific text narrative. It
                        includes expressions serving as connectors of different textual parts ("in
                        addition", "mentioned above", etc.), expressions indicating information
                        source (like "in their/our opinion"), and estimating expressions (e.g., "it
                        seems reasonable").
                    Each item of the phraseological database integrates all semantically
                        equivalent variants (synonyms) of a particular expression that are described
                        by a semantico-syntactic pattern with associated information including an
                        explanation of its meaning and examples of typical sentences exploiting it.
                        Empty valences of the expression are indicated in the pattern, with
                        specification of their semantic roles.
                
                
                    Conclusions
                    We have described both the methodological framework and the main features of
                        a computer system intended for learning phraseology of Russian sci-tech
                        texts. Its interrelated components, i.e. phraseology database and
                        educational material represented in hypertext form, are partially
                        implemented with the aid of Borland Delphi environment tools.
                    Among directions of system improvement being now under consideration we
                        should point out further extension of phraseology lexicon. Text corpora
                        reflecting contemporary sci-tech language usage will supposedly be
                        exploited, since features of any style and sublanguage can be revealed
                        exhaustively on the basis of corpus analysis (Biber et al. 1998).
                    Another direction concerns merging into a common database of scientific
                        phraseologies of several natural languages. Preliminary comparative study of
                        scientific phraseology of Russian, English, and Spanish languages shows an
                        evident similarity of their word stereotypes. This fact can be used for the
                        systematical computer-aided teaching of foreign scientific phraseology.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Biber
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Conrad
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Reppen
                                
                            
                            Corpus Linguistics. Investigating Language Structure
                                and Use
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            I.
                                    Bolshakov
                            Multifunctional Thesaurus for Russian Word
                                Processing
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of 4th Conference on Applied Natural
                                Language Processing, Stuttgard, 13-15 October, 1994
                            
                                
                                
                                1994
                                200-202
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            P.
                                    Brusilovsky
                            Methods and Techniques of Adaptive Hypermedia
                        
                        
                            User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction
                            
                                6
                                2-3
                                87-129
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            E.
                                    Bolshakova
                            Computer Assistance in Writing Technical and Scientific
                                Texts
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of 2nd International Symposium "Las
                                Humanidades en la Educacion Tecnica ante el Siglo XXI", Mexico,
                                27-29 September, 2000
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                                59-63
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Dictionary of Verb-Noun Combinations of the Common
                                Scientific Speech
                            
                                Moscow
                                Nauka Publ.
                                1973
                            
                        
                        (in Russian).
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Fellbaum
                                
                            
                            WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database
                            
                                Cambridge
                                MIT Press
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Grishman
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Kittredge
                                
                            
                            Analyzing Language in Restricted Domains: Sublanguage
                                Description and Processing
                            
                                Hillsdale, N.J.
                                Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
                                1986
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    O.
                                    Mitrofanova
                                
                            
                            Language of Scientific and Technical Literature
                            
                                
                                Moscow University Press 
                                1973
                            
                        
                        (in Russian).
                    
                
            
        
    
