

    
        
            
                Conceptualizing DH for Multiple Audiences: Folkvine and Chinavine
                
                    
                        Janz
                        Bruce
                    
                    U of Central Florida, United States of America
                    bbjanz@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    multiple audiences
                    hermeneutics
                    folk art
                
                
                    philosophy
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    user studies / user needs
                    asian studies
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    folklore and oral history
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Understanding audiences is crucial to the design of digital humanities projects, and understanding that there may be more than one audience and designing for that should be part of the initial discussion for DH design. Past that, though, we need better theorization of the phenomenon of the audience in the digital humanities. My examples will be two DH projects I have been involved with. Folkvine (http://folkvine.umbc.edu/) and Chinavine (http://chinavine.org/) both collect and make available folk arts, the first in Florida and the second in China. The goal for both of these projects has been to serve multiple audiences. Both approached the question of multiple audiences slightly differently. Awareness of multiple audiences could lead to a more reflexive and reflective attitude for designers and for the audiences. It could be less about consumption of digital content and more about rethinking the presentation of self and community. My attempt to introduce hermeneutics here is to move past the notion that questions of audience are just questions of usability or reception. DH projects create a world between the architects, subjects, and users; this is an attempt to interrogate one aspect of that world.
        
    
