


    
        
            
                The Making of America II: Towards a Standardized
                    Architecture for the Digitization of Primary Sources
                
                    
                        Jerome
                        P.
                        McDonough
                        Library Systems Office University of
                                California at Berkeley
                            jmcdonou@library.berkeley.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Merrilee
                        Proffitt
                        The Bancroft Library Unversity of
                                California
                            mproffit@library.berkeley.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The primary resources in the nation's research libraries, which constitute an
                    invaluable foundation for research, are increasingly viewed as resources for
                    teaching and learning for students in elementary school through college. The
                    geographic distribution of such collections added to the fragility and
                    uniqueness of many primary source materials have always presented barriers to
                    access. Digital technologies offer opportunities to overcome these problems of
                    geographic distribution and fragility of primary sources by making digital
                    surrogates of the materials available on the Internet where they can be used by
                    scholars, students, and the general public.
                The Making Of America II Testbed Project See &lt;&gt; for details regarding
                        the MoA II project. (MoA II) continues and extends research and
                    demonstration projects that have begun to develop best practices for the
                    encoding of intellectual, structural, and administrative data regarding primary
                    resources housed in research libraries. It builds most directly on the
                    development of the Encoded Archival Description (EAD) (EAD Working Group, 1998),
                    now being maintained jointly by The Society of American Archivists and the
                    Library of Congress. While the EAD provides a community standard for encoding
                    finding aids, it does not provide any guidance for creating or encoding the
                    digitized surrogates of the primary source materials which may be contained in
                    collections. Therefore, the next step in the process of developing seamless
                    access through EAD-encoded finding aids is the development of related community
                    practices for creating and encoding the digitized versions of the primary
                    sources.
                The MoA II project proposes a Digital Library Service Model in which services are
                    based on tools that work with the digital objects from distributed repositories.
                    A digital object is defined as encapsulating content, metadata and methods. Our
                    hope is that the MoA II project can serve as a first step towards the
                    standardization of digital objects' content, metadata and methods. We believe
                    that such standardization will vastly reduce the effort needed to develop tools
                    and services that work with materials from different content providers.
                The MoA II object model defines classes of digital archival objects (e.g.,
                    diaries, journals, photographs, correspondence, etc.). As expected, each object
                    in a given class has content (e.g., ASCII text, TIFF images, SGML documents)
                    that is a digital representation of a particular item. In addition to content,
                    any given class of archival object also encapsulates descriptive, structural and
                    administrative metadata used to discover, display, navigate, manipulate and
                    learn more about a particular object's management information. Finally, a class
                    of archival object will encapsulate a variety of associated methods, where the
                    methods are used by tools to retrieve, store or manipulate that object's
                    content.
                To support this model, the MoA II project has implemented has three major
                    components: (1) a database system for capturing metadata regarding digital
                    objects, and encoding that information in XML format; (2) a program which will
                    take that XML metadata description for a given archival object and produce a set
                    of Java class files that incorporate the metadata and methods necessary to
                    manipulate the metadata and content of the object (Jones, 1997); and (3) a
                    browser for selecting objects for display and navigating within those objects.
                    In combination, this system allows archives to track their work flow in creating
                    digitized versions of primary source material while simultaneously capturing
                    associated descriptive, administrative, and structural metadata, encapsulate
                    that information in object format for dissemination, and present those objects
                    to users in a manner that facilitates the objects' navigation and use. Further
                    information about each of these tools, including the DTD for the XML format and
                    a demonstration version of the object browser, are available at the MoA II web
                    site. Development of a test digital library using these tools is currently being
                    undertaken by the MoA II project teams at Cornell University, New York Public
                    Library, Pennsylvania State University, Stanford University, and the University
                    of California at Berkeley.
                The MoA II system architecture as currently implemented has demonstrated the
                    feasibility of the object model for providing access to digital versions of
                    archival material, as well as providing an initial suite of tools for creating,
                    disseminating and using such digital objects. By establishing an XML DTD
                    describing the necessary metadata elements for production of such digital
                    objects, the MoA II project has attempted to help start the discussion of how
                    such digital objects might be standardized. The project has also identified some
                    potential areas for further research, including the best mechanisms for encoding
                    the complex relationships between object content and descriptive, structural and
                    administrative metadata, how we might standardize document display mechanisms
                    for scholarly use, and whether we might be able to standardize application
                    program interfaces (APIs) for interacting with digital archival objects. We hope
                    that the development of the MoA II system will encourage other members of the
                    archival community both to begin exploring the process of providing access to
                    digital versions of their materials, and participate in efforts to help
                    standardize the implementation of such materials in order to ease the
                    development of tools and services for archive patrons.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Encoded Archival Description Working Group, Society
                                    of American Archivists
                            
                            Encoded Archival Description Document Type
                                Definition
                            (Version 1.0) [On-line]
                            
                                
                                    Daniel
                                    Pitti
                                
                            
                            
                                Chicago
                                Society of American Archivists
                                1998
                            
                        
                        Available on the World Wide Web: &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Jones
                                
                            
                            Java and Libraries: Digital and Otherwise
                        
                        
                            D-Lib Magazine
                            [On-line]
                            
                                Reston, VA
                                Corporation for National Research Initiatives
                                3
                                
                                
                                March 1997
                            
                        
                        Available on the World Wide Web: &lt;&gt;
                    
                
            
        
    
