


    
        
            
                Sociologies of the Dickinson &amp; Whitman Projects at
                    Jefferson Village: Digital Texts and Print Companions
                
                    
                        Martha
                        Nell
                        Smith
                        Department of English University of Maryland
                                at College Park
                            ms63@umail.umd.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Kenneth
                        M.
                        Price
                        American Studies College of William &amp;
                                Mary
                            ken.price@wm.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Literary productions and their distributions are deeply affected by social
                    contexts, and this talk explores the sometimes congruent and sometimes divergent
                    purposes of two projects, the Dickinson Electronic
                        Archives &lt;&gt; and the Whitman Hypertext Archive &lt;&gt;, their relationships in
                    their FIPSE-sponsored co-production involving eleven American literature
                    scholars from around the United States &lt;&gt;, and
                    their relationships to print predecessors and contemporary print companions.
                    These two projects are committed to reediting the writings of the two most
                    celebrated nineteenth-century American poets and also to developing pedagogical
                    tools from these research projects. The projects are linked by a shared belief
                    that previous editions have distorted basic features of the work of these poets.
                    Moreover the projects are linked institutionally through common sponsorship by
                    the Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities at the University of
                    Virginia &lt;&gt; and through
                    three-year renewable grant support from the U.S. Department of Education (the
                    grant will enable us to build a third site, a pedagogically oriented tool
                    entitled The Classroom Electric: Dickinson, Whitman, &amp;
                        American Culture). Our talk, an analytical dialogue, will initially
                    clarify the nature of the Dickinson and Whitman archives by contrasting them
                    with their major print predecessors and contemporary print companions (in the
                    case of the Dickinson project, the new variorum of The Poems of
                        Emily Dickinson, ed. R. W. Franklin, and new edition of her writings
                    to her primary correspondent, Open Me Carefully: Emily
                        Dickinson's Intimate Letters to Susan Huntington Dickinson, ed.
                    Martha Nell Smith &amp; Ellen Louise Hart). We will then discuss some of the
                    challenges and opportunities we have encountered in our effort to use two
                    scholarly editing projects as the basis for developing an interlinked
                    pedagogical tool and report on the first and second years (of three, hopefully
                    more) of bringing eleven American literature specialists from around the U.S.
                    together to develop the joint project. These specialists are not necessarily
                    Whitman or Dickinson scholars nor have they had much experience with digital
                    resources.
                Throughout much of the first century of producing books of Dickinson's poems,
                    editors have labored to establish the identities of particular poems and to make
                    authoritative--most faithful to the poet's original or final intentions and/or
                    most aesthetically, sensibly pleasing--printed translations of Dickinson's
                    holographs, though question after question has been raised about what
                    constitutes "most authoritative." Generally, editors have worked to translate
                    Dickinson's holograph into easily legible typeface. Not surprisingly, how poems
                    are conventionally typeset has framed perceptions of her lyrics and thus
                    dictated conceptions of accurate representations of Dickinson's poems, of what
                    does and does not count as a constitutive part of the poem and as the techniques
                    and forms of its expression. Thus, following routine procedures, editors have
                    debated which variant is preferable and have chosen one to make a conventional
                    reader's edition instead of imagining that presenting all variants and leaving
                    the choice up to readers' improvisations might be Dickinson's "ideal reader's
                    edition," making her poetic project more fully available to her readers. Smith
                    will demonstrate different approaches of the Dickinson Editing Collective's
                    production performances in the Dickinson Electronic
                        Archives by focusing on how "Safe in their Alabaster Chambers" (one
                    of only 10, out of 1800, poems to be printed during the poet's lifetime), which
                    Dickinson repeatedly revised but never conventionally "finished" (i.e., by
                    deciding on a "final, fixed" version) can be used to display and investigate
                    Dickinson's revisionary process. In this, Smith will analyze her roles producing
                    this for both electronic and print media. Bibliographic biases, making the
                    production of the printed book, have centered Dickinson studies for the last
                    century, but the Dickinson Electronic Archives places
                    Dickinson's own production and circulation of her writings (by sending poem and
                    letter-poems out in letters, by making her poems available for reading in the
                    parlors of the Dickinson families and their acquaintances, and by making 40
                    manuscript volumes of her poems) at the heart of critical, pedagogical inquiry.
                    The Dickinson Electronic Archives presents all of
                    Dickinson's writings to 99 different correspondents and will feature digitized
                    databases of all print translations of her work from the nineteenth-century to
                    the present, as well as various biographical, geographical, bibliographical, and
                    cultural resources (e.g., Atlantic Monthly articles read by Dickinson and
                    especially pertinent to her poetic endeavors).
                Smith's presentation will focus on "Emily Dickinson Writing a Poem" (in Access
                    Restricted part of the site, &lt;&gt;;
                    login: dickinson; password; ink_on_disc; login is case
                        sensitive), probing in depth how using one tiny part of the entire
                    archive can revolutionize coursework and classroom interactions. From Archives in the Classroom, Smith will show "Emily
                    Dickinson in the Youth's Companion," a hypertextual
                    critical investigation of the poet's work in a best-selling late
                    nineteenth-/early twentieth-century periodical. She will also briefly show
                    various outreach components of the Dickinson Electronic
                        Archives--e.g., the Contemporary Youth's
                        Companion edited by a teenager and featuring young people's
                    responses to the work of Emily Dickinson as well as their own creative
                    endeavors. And she will also briefly show the critical online edition of Writings by Susan Dickinson &lt;&gt;, featuring
                    papers that have been lost to literary history for the past century, and will
                    describe how this is being used pedagogically as well as for scholarly
                    resource.
                Like the Dickinson project, the Whitman project is prone to disperse attention
                    widely. The major print predecessor, The Collected Writings of
                        Walt Whitman, in contrast, privileges the final edition of Leaves of
                    Grass, the 1881-82 edition. The Whitman Hypertext
                        Archive &lt;&gt;
                    differs from the NYU edition in dispensing with the Deathbed edition as a
                    "center." The Whitman project presents the full text of every edition of Leaves of Grass plus prose writings, letters, reviews, a
                    secondary bibliography, photographs, and a range of contextual material.
                    Hypertext makes obvious a truth that print culture discouraged us from
                    acknowledging: all texts are potentially useful depending on what questions one
                    wants to ask. Whitman's poetry is a proliferation of versions, and such fluidity
                    is ill-adapted to the rigidities of print presentation.
                However much the Whitman editors question some basic assumptions of the NYU
                    edition, they also recognize that it is a major achievement, that it is the
                    conventional source for scholarly citation, that much of its editorial work need
                    not be redone, and that electronic editing, by its nature, is capable of
                    incorporating past editorial efforts. Yet our relation to the NYU edition brings
                    with it a host of knotty problems. When forty-plus years have been devoted to
                    the creation of a print edition, what obligations and responsibilities do
                    electronic editors have to maintain the integrity of such an edition, even if it
                    is now incomplete and sometimes in error. How should electronic editors deal
                    with inconsistencies built into print editions? To what extent should they
                    strive to maintain the original print pagination and annotation (so as to make
                    the electronic edition, at least for a generation, easily translatable to the
                    print editions embedded in the scholarship). Is one goal of the electronic
                    editor to create a version of the printed monumental that allows users, through
                    hypertext, to unweave the edition back into its constituent parts (facsimiles of
                    the manuscripts of each letter, for example), so that the electronic edition in
                    effect offers users the materials out of which they could construct their own
                    edition of the letters or the notebooks--a counter-edition to the original print
                    edition--if they so desired? Is the role of an electronic edition, then, in some
                    way to deconstruct the very monumental print edition that might serve as the
                    organizational center of the electronic edition? Does the print edition offer
                    orderings and understandings that should be resisted in the hypermedia
                    edition?
                Price will then demonstrate some of the College of William &amp; Mary and
                    University of Maryland student-produced projects using the Whitman Hypertext Archive--a critical/editorial interrogation,
                    "Walt Whitman: Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking"; a study of influence and
                    the transmigration of texts, "Whitman and Opera"; a project contextualizing the
                    poet's work in nineteenth-century "science," "Whitman and Phrenology"; and a
                    project contextualizing the poet's work in nineteenth- and twentieth-century
                    ideologies of sexuality and propriety, "Genders and Identities in the Poetry of
                    Walt Whitman" (all available under The Archive in the
                        Classroom at the Whitman site; &lt;&gt;.
                The editors of the Dickinson and Whitman projects will close their talk by
                    reflecting on the pedagogical and scholarly implications of their joint
                    undertaking by showing some of the sites produced by the FIPSE
                    participants--Whitman and New York; Dickinson, Whitman and Temperance;
                    Dickinson, Scraps, and Late Stages of Composition; Dickinson, Whitman, and
                    Slavery; Dickinson's Confederate Uncle &lt;&gt; and Civil War Publications. Thus Smith and Price will review some of the
                    ways that the Dickinson Electronic Archives and the
                        Whitman Hypertext Archive engage the sociologies of
                    editing these poets' works for various media and critical/pedagogical needs,
                    their critical dialogues with print editions, with one another, and with their
                    joint endeavor, raising various questions about the goals, challenges,
                    disappointments, and serendipities of these undertakings.
            
        
    
