


    
        
            
                Defining Paragraphs - the basic unit of prose?
                
                    
                        Catherine
                        Goodall
                        
                            Brown University
                            catherine_goodall@brown.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                P3 does not foresee the inclusion of verse within prose paragraphs. Many
                    occurrences of verse in prose paragraphs are quoted passages, and do not present
                    encoding difficulties. However, when the verse passage is attributable to the
                    same narrative voice as the surrounding prose paragraph, the use of Q and QUOTE
                    is inappropriate. The two common definitions of a paragraph consider it to be a
                    unit of content or typography. Another approach considers the occurrence of
                    "something else" (e.g. poetry) to constitute the end of a paragraph. While
                    probably sufficient for most formatting functions, this does not adequately
                    describe the conceptual structure of the passage, i.e. a group of verse lines
                    embedded in a prose paragraph. Since the description of both the physical and
                    the conceptual text is an important goal of the encoding, this definition was
                    unsatisfactory. Possible solutions included: (1) using 2 P elements and an LG
                    and linking them using JOIN or next= and prev=; (2) nesting the LG within TEXT
                    within P; and (3) modifying the content model of P to allow LG as its direct
                    child. The latter emerged as the most accurate and efficient solution. It is
                    consistent with the typographical and thematic continuity of the material and
                    thus with the most prevalent definitions of a paragraph. It facilitates the
                    accurate description of concrete examples already found as well as
                    unconventional ones with more heavily intermingled verse and prose. Finally, it
                    minimizes the tagging necessary to describe the passage and its structure.
            
        
    
