


    
        
            
                Intellectual problems in scholarly encoding
                
                    
                        Harold
                        Short
                        Centre for Computing in the Humanities King's
                                College London
                            harold.short@kcl.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Mavis
                        H.
                        Cournane
                        
                            The European Foundation
                            cournane@imbolc.ucc.ie
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Donnchadh
                        Ó Corráin
                        
                            The European Foundation
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Claus
                        Huitfeldt
                        Wittgenstein Archives University of
                                Bergen
                            Claus.Huitfeldt@hit.uib.no
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Willard
                        McCarty
                        Centre for Computing in the Humanities King's
                                College London
                            willard.mccarty@kcl.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Harold Short, Chair
                    This session offers three views on intellectual problems and consequences in
                        the scholarly encoding of texts. Two papers (Cournane and McCarty) approach
                        the issues by direct engagement with literary texts, the third (Huitfeldt)
                        by a philosophical analysis of the terms "representation" and
                        "interpretation".
                    Issues of implementation in hardware and software and of any specific
                        metalanguage are deliberately excluded. Important though these matters are
                        to humanities scholars who work with texts, and significant though the TEI
                        has been and continues to be for the field, there is always the danger that
                        preoccupation with means may obscure intellectual analysis or that
                        familiarity with a specific system or set of tools may lead one to approach
                        a new problem from the perspective of the already-intended solution.
                    This session therefore focuses specifically on the intersection and
                        interaction of the philosophical and critical perspectives with the
                        computation, trying to avoid implementation questions. Although it deals
                        specifically with markup, its subject is essentially that of humanities
                        computing as a whole: the electronic medium as an instrument of perception
                        and analysis.
                
                
                    
                        Reasoning the rhyme: The encoding of complex early Irish Poetry
                        Mavis H. Cournane
                        Donnchadh Ó Corráin
                        
                            
                                Introduction
                                Poetry was the most significant literary genre in early medieval
                                    Ireland. Medieval Irish verse is composed in accordance with
                                    strict metrical rules laid down by influential schools of
                                    poetry. These rules are prescribed in medieval handbooks of
                                    metrics that were used in the schools to train poets in the
                                    intricate rules of Irish metrics. Detailed rules in normative
                                    text were prescribed for metre, alliteration, and rhyme. The
                                    encoding of the metrical features of Irish verse will serve a
                                    variety of the following ends: 
                                        it occasions detailed and rigorous metrical analysis
                                            of a kind not usually done to this level of
                                            consciousness;
                                        it enables the generation of textual statistics in
                                            regard to metrical features and it enables the testing
                                            of the prescriptions of the handbooks against the poetic
                                            corpus; 
                                        since the application of metrical features changes
                                            over time and between poets, it is an aid to
                                            establishing dating, authorship and milieu of
                                            texts;
                                        pedagogically, it enables the construction of
                                            multi-faceted teaching tools for training students in
                                            the intricacies of metre (they usually find it
                                            difficult). For example, with appropriate software,
                                            different views of metre can be presented clearly and
                                            unambiguously.
                                    
                                
                                The encoding mechanism chosen has to satisfy a number of
                                    intellectual requirements:
                                        it has to aid a comprehensive analysis of the poems to
                                            check if they obey the rules set out in the handbooks of
                                            metrics;
                                        as these metrical rules change over time the encoding
                                            mechanism has to have the flexibility to reflect
                                            this;
                                        it has to facilitate the testing of the normative
                                            prescription against the actual performance of metrical
                                            rules either within an individual poem or across an
                                            entire corpus.
                                    
                            
                            
                                Methodology
                                The metrical features covered in this discussion are:
                                        rhyme (final and internal);
                                        alliteration;
                                        formal closure.
                                    
                                To satisfy encoding requirements a the single element
                                    (&lt;seg&gt;) with carefully arranged attributes is used to
                                    encode all the necessary features. However, this is laborious
                                    and time consuming and a question about this method is--is the
                                    end result commensurate with the effort? This is difficult to
                                    answer but non-computer analysis is at least as time consuming,
                                    probably less productive in results and, further, the data so
                                    generated are not readily exchangeable.
                            
                            
                                Conclusion
                                An encoding scheme such as that offered by the TEI currently
                                    allows for the encoding of the complexities of Irish poetry in a
                                    very generic way using the &lt;seg&gt; element and the refining
                                    attributes of type and subtype. However, markup for markup's
                                    sake is not an end in itself---the encoding must serve some
                                    useful purpose. As demonstrated above, encoding in TEI is useful
                                    for making the workings of early Irish metrics more transparent
                                    for the student and serves as a useful pedagogical tool for the
                                    teacher of this subject. Ongoing research on this paper will
                                    attempt to identify the depth of markup needed to do a more
                                    complete statistical analysis of metrics in early Irish verse
                                    and will suggests ways in which the TEI may be extended to meet
                                    the demands of such analysis.
                            
                        
                        
                            Bibliography
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Osborn
                                                J.Bergin
                                        Metrica
                                    
                                    
                                        Ériu
                                        
                                            8
                                            
                                            161-69
                                            1916
                                            9
                                            77-84
                                            1921-1923
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        Liam
                                                Breatnach
                                        Zur frage der "roscada" im irischen
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                H.
                                                L.
                                                C.
                                                Tristam
                                            
                                        
                                        Metrik und Medienwechsel/ Metrics and
                                            Media
                                        
                                            Tübingen
                                            
                                            1991
                                            197-205
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        James
                                                Carney
                                        Linking alliteration (`fidrad
                                            freccomail')
                                    
                                    
                                        Éigse
                                        
                                            18
                                            
                                            251-62
                                            1980-1981
                                        
                                    
                                    [metrics]
                                
                                
                                    
                                        David
                                                Chisholm
                                        David
                                                Robey
                                        Encoding Verse Texts
                                    
                                    
                                        Computers and the Humanities
                                        
                                            29
                                            2
                                            99-111
                                            1995
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        Rijklof
                                                Hofman
                                        Moines irlandais et métrique latine
                                    
                                    
                                        Études Celtiques
                                        
                                            27
                                            
                                            235-66
                                            1990
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        Kaarina
                                                Hollo
                                        The alliterative structure of Mael Ísu Ó
                                            Brolcháin's A aingil, beir
                                    
                                    
                                        Ériu
                                        
                                            41
                                            
                                            77-80
                                            1990
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Paul
                                                Klopsch
                                            
                                        
                                        Einführung in die mittellateinische
                                            Verslehre
                                        
                                            Darmstadt
                                            
                                            1972
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Jürgen
                                                Leonhardt
                                            
                                        
                                        Dimensio syllabarum: Studien zur
                                            lateinischen Prosodie und Verslehre vone der Spätantike
                                            bus zur frühen Renaissance
                                        Hypomnemata: Untersuchungen zur Antike und
                                            zu ihrem Nachleben
                                        
                                            92
                                            Göttingen
                                            
                                            1989
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Michael
                                                Sperberg-McQueen
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Lou
                                                Burnard
                                            
                                        
                                        Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
                                            Interchange (P3)
                                        
                                            Chicago, Oxford
                                            
                                            1994
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Kuno
                                                Meyer
                                            
                                        
                                        A primer of Irish metrics
                                        
                                            Dublin
                                            
                                            1909
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Gerard
                                                Murphy
                                            
                                        
                                        Early Irish metrics
                                        
                                            Dublin
                                            
                                            1961
                                            repr. 1963
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Text Encoding, Representation and Interpretation
                        Claus Huitfeldt
                        
                            This paper argues that representation and interpretation should be
                                regarded as relationships between concrete texts and their
                                audiences, not as separate entities in some realm of mental or
                                abstract objects. This perspective proves especially fruitful to
                                discussions of the role of interpretation in text encoding.
                             Current views on how text encoding relates to matters of
                                representation and interpretation seem confused. On the one hand,
                                many encoding projects in the humanities find their raison d'etre in a claim to represent some
                                body of texts in an accurate and reliable form. So-called
                                "descriptive" text encoding is an essential tool in such efforts. On
                                the other hand, difficulties in these attempts to create objectively
                                accurate representations are often blamed on a seemingly inescapable
                                "interpretive" element in transcription and encoding.
                            But if text encoding is itself at bottom interpretive, how can it be
                                used to represent texts at all? On the
                                other hand, if everything about this supposedly representational
                                device is at bottom interpretive, doesn't the distinction between
                                representation and interpretation become rather empty?
                            I propose two steps to get out of this problem. As a first step, we
                                may imagine representation and interpretation as different parts of
                                one continuum. Our task is to find a suitable location for a
                                demarcation line between the two areas somewhere along this
                                continuum. Then, by stating that something is a representation, we
                                are not excluding the possibility that it might in some other
                                perspective be seen as an interpretation, i.e. that the demarcation
                                line might legitimately have been drawn elsewhere. Nor are we
                                denying that representations and interpretations are, in some deeper
                                perspective, of the same kind. But we deny the usefulness of a
                                demarcation line placed at one extreme of the continuum.
                            The second step is this: "Representation" and "interpretation" are
                                best seen as names for relations between texts. Derivatively, the
                                terms may then also refer to individual texts which have these
                                relationships to other texts. The move can be brought one step
                                further by extending the relationships to include the texts' audiences: Texts are not representations or
                                interpretations of each other in
                                    abstracto, but only in relation to certain audiences of
                                human, i.e. social, historical and cultural beings.
                            On the basis of these two steps, we can clarify the role of text
                                encoding in representation and interpretation. The word "interpret",
                                as used in relation to text, has at least two broad senses: 
                                    1. To identify the meaning of a text (reading, listening,
                                        deciphering) 
                                    2. To explain the meaning of a text (paraphrasing,
                                        analysing, discussing) 
                                
                            Whereas the first of these senses talks about identification of meaning, the second talks about explanation of meaning. On the relational
                                view suggested above, the meaning of a text can only be given by
                                another text: identification as well as explanation must themselves
                                take the form of text.
                            My proposal is that we reserve the word "representation" for the
                                    identification of meaning. Just as
                                identification normally precedes explanation, representation
                                normally precedes interpretation. To represent a text, then, is to
                                identify and reproduce its meaning in the form of another text. This
                                meaning is the linguistic content, roughly in the sense of what
                                representatives of the Text Encoding
                                    Initiative seem to refer to when they speak about "the
                                text itself", or what Nelson Goodman has
                                called "sequences of letters, spaces and punctuation marks" [Goodman
                                1976, p 115]. For some purposes we may legitimately want to extend
                                this definition to include compositional or typographic features
                                like paragraphs, chapters, font shifts etc., but as an absolute
                                minimum it must include linguistic content in the sense just
                                indicated. This is as close as we can come to a "rock bottom" of
                                objective facts in textual scholarship.
                            Neither the faculties and skills nor the arguments and methods we
                                employ in identifying text in this sense are essentially different
                                from those we employ in interpretive activities. This observation is
                                simply a restatement of the principle of the "hermeneutic circle",
                                which also accounts for the fact that just as interpretations are
                                made on the basis of representations, representations themselves may
                                be revised in the light of interpretations.
                            According to what we have said so far, to interpret a text is either
                                    1. to put forth another text
                                        which is rephrasing or commenting upon the first, or
                                    2. to add something to the
                                        original text which contributes to a more or less specific
                                        understanding of it.
                                
                            We may call the first kind of interpretation "stand-alone", and the
                                second "in-line".
                            For in-line interpretation, which is the main focus of the rest of
                                this paper, text encoding provides exciting possibilities. Some
                                examples are:
                                    comments,
                                    links,
                                    alternate structures, and
                                    thematic tagging.
                                
                            A detailed discussion, including a discussion of how such devices
                                have been judged by one specific encoding project (the Wittgenstein
                                Archives), will provide examples of the kinds of considerations
                                which may be relevant for the application of interpretive encoding
                                in philosophy as well as other disciplines.
                            The discussion suggests that the proposed understanding of encoding
                                practices agrees with the following, common-sense view of
                                representation and interpretation:
                                    1. A text is a representation of
                                        another text if the first has the same linguistic content,
                                        i.e. the same wording, as the other.
                                    2. A text is an interpretation of
                                        another text if the first is not a
                                        representation of the other, but explains, discusses, or
                                        gives an alternative account of the meaning of the other
                                        with other words.
                                    3. A text may contain both a
                                        representation and an interpretation of another text,
                                        provided that the representation and interpretation are
                                        clearly distinguished from each other.
                                
                        
                        
                            References
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Nelson
                                                Goodman
                                            
                                        
                                        The Languages of Art: An approach to a
                                            Theory of Symbols
                                        2nd ed
                                        
                                            Indianapolis
                                            Bobbs-Merrill
                                            1969
                                            1976
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Arne
                                                Næss
                                            
                                        
                                        Communication and Argument - Elements of
                                            Applied Semantics
                                        
                                            Oslo
                                            Universitetsforlaget
                                            1966
                                            1981
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                C.
                                                Michael
                                                Sperberg-McQueen
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                Lou
                                                Burnard
                                            
                                        
                                        Guidelines for the Encoding and Interchange
                                            of Machine-Readable Texts (TEI P3)
                                        
                                            Chicago &amp; Oxford
                                            
                                            1994
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Ludwig
                                                Wittgenstein
                                            
                                        
                                        Wittgenstein's Nachlass. The Bergen
                                            Electronic Edition
                                        CD-ROM Edition in four volumes
                                        
                                            
                                            Oxford University Press
                                            1998-99
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Thinking with markup: the case of personification
                        Willard McCarty
                        
                            In this paper I use the specific case of personification in Ovid's
                                    Metamorphoses to test the notion that
                                encoding is an intellectual act which affects how we understand a
                                text.
                            I begin by considering the role of the machine in the act of
                                encoding, arguing that the sorting capacity of the computer, by
                                bringing all tags of an identical type together, tends to result in
                                a degree of systemacity not known or perhaps possible before. It
                                becomes practical to work at a very fine level of detail over a
                                large text because individual interpretations can so easily be
                                brought together. Because only identical items are sorted together,
                                reduction of variety to a limited set of categories is strongly
                                rewarded, and so consistency is enforced. The inability of the
                                machine to handle anything not completely explicit means that
                                encoding is a starkly declarative process. Thus all ambiguities to
                                be encoded must be completely resolved. The interesting matter is
                                not simply that the encoder is forced to make difficult, highly
                                interpretative decisions which the conventional literary critic can
                                and perhaps should avoid; he or she is apt to see problems that were
                                not apparent as problems before.
                            Personification (lit. "person-making") is a case in point. In the
                                paper I show how the twin computational imperatives of completely
                                explicit and rigorously consistent representation, by framing the
                                mental operations of rendering personification into a computational
                                metalanguage, change how and what we think about it.
                            I approach the trope as a phenomenon for encoding against the
                                background of its long rhetorical and literary-critical tradition
                                (Paxson 1994; McCarty 1993; McCarty 1994). Curiously, this tradition
                                seems almost entirely irrelevant to a computational approach -
                                precisely because computation changes what we see and how we are
                                able to think about it. Instead of looking at the roles
                                personificated characters play in the stories where they occur, as
                                scholars have done for the past two and a half millennia, the
                                encoder focuses on how even the most minor personifications come
                                into being linguistically.
                            After a brief introduction to the Metamorphoses and the ontological context it provides
                                for personification, I describe my descriptive grammar of the trope.
                                Then I examine in detail specific instances under three categories,
                                considering each candidate against the criteria defined in my
                                grammar. These criteria consist of local features in the language
                                modified in their effect by 5 different types of context.
                            The first two categories cover uniquely personified instances and
                                those with an uneven history of personification, respectively; the
                                third, entities that are evidently personified by the influence of
                                an anthropomorph, such as Medea or Orpheus. I show that in addition
                                to the local factors (which I take as primary) each category
                                manifests a different range of dependencies on various of the
                                contexts described in the grammar.
                            A fourth category is reserved for a significant exception to the rule
                                that personifications are created through some alteration of a
                                sub-human entity. It identifies entities ontologically unusual by
                                nature rather than through change. I include them because they are
                                products of the human imagination, therefore closer to humanity than
                                actual beasts and so implicitly personified. They also exemplify the
                                commanding role of interpretative decision in the absence of direct
                                evidence.
                            In addition to the successful personifications, I also focus on
                                liminal cases so as to emphasise the computationally unjustifiable,
                                hence arbitrary, interpretative nature of the encoding decision. I
                                show how by excluding them two things are accomplished: we gain a
                                delimited and therefore useful set of phenomena, and precisely by
                                excluding the problematic cases we throw strong light on the
                                workings of ambiguity in the poem. Thus markup simultaneously
                                mistranslates and illuminates.
                            I argue in the paper for the idea that a coherently rendered metatext
                                is a modifiable interpretative representation of its text, i.e. a
                                model, and that as is common to the practice of modelling, its
                                mutability is essential to its purpose. I show how, in the specific
                                case of personification, the problematic cases invite disagreement,
                                and how a computational form of publication serves the base nature
                                of interpretative markup by allowing the user to alter encoding
                                decisions and automatically regenerate the compiled work.
                            In conclusion I address the overall question of how scholarly
                                encoding and scholarship in a given field interrelate. From my
                                example, it seems clear that computational encoding allows the
                                scholar systematically to model the behaviour of a complex poetic
                                trope for a specific text, producing a useful list of instances, a
                                descriptive grammar and liminal cases that raise illuminating
                                questions. It seems likely that this grammar can be applied usefully
                                to other texts and that it can provide a starting point both for a
                                broader understanding of the trope and for further computational
                                work on the elusive idea of context. Less obvious is the profound
                                dependence of an encoding on a prior, readerly conception of the
                                text. Thus, for Ovidian personification, the redefinition of what is
                                meant by 'person,' down to the level at which markup provides real
                                help, proceeds from a reading in which apparently minor ontological
                                flux is given major importance -- a critical choice not a textual
                                inevitability. Thus phenomena appear as candidates for markup
                                because of the interpretative reading that frames them.
                            Hence encoding is essentially a means of scholarly thought and
                                expression. This means that encoding is not in essence or only a
                                backroom technical operation, rather a language of expression that
                                scholars may need to read directly as a matter of course. If our
                                goal is the stability of a standard encoding metalanguage against
                                the flux of hardware and software, then direct encounter with it
                                would seem to be unavoidable. Furthermore, experience with natural
                                language suggests strongly that simplicity and perspicuity of style
                                are closely allied with if not preconditions for profundity of
                                content. Is readable, perspicuous metalanguage an achievable goal?
                                The intellectual view of encoding would suggest that it must be.
                            
                        
                        
                            References
                            
                                
                                    
                                        W.
                                                McCarty
                                        Encoding Persons and Places in the Metamorphoses of Ovid: 1.
                                            Engineering the Text
                                    
                                    
                                        Texte et Informatique
                                        Texte: Revue de Critique et de Théorie
                                            Littéraire
                                        
                                            13/14
                                            
                                            
                                            121-72
                                            1993
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        W.
                                                McCarty
                                        Encoding Persons and Places in the Metamorphoses of Ovid. Part 2: The
                                            Metatextual Translation
                                    
                                    
                                        Texte, Métatexte, Métalangage
                                        Texte: Revue de Critique et de Théorie
                                            Littéraire 
                                        
                                            15/16
                                            
                                            
                                            261-305
                                            1994
                                        
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                W.
                                                McCarty
                                            
                                        
                                        A provisional grammar of personification
                                            for the Met
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                            
                                            1998
                                        
                                    
                                    &lt;&gt;.
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                James
                                                J.
                                                Paxson
                                            
                                        
                                        The poetics of personification
                                        Literature, Culture, Theory
                                        RichardMacksey
                                        MichaelSpinker
                                        
                                            6
                                            Cambridge
                                            Cambridge University Press
                                            1994
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
