


    
        
            
                A broadcast architecture for distributed text
                    tools
                
                    
                        Steven
                        J.
                        DeRose
                        Computer Center University of Illinois at
                                Chicago
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        C.
                        M.
                        Spergberg-McQueen
                        Computer Center University of Illinois at
                                Chicago
                            cmsmcq@acm.org
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Adequate textual analysis software is difficult to create. Scholarly users
                        have special requirements seldom met by commercial packages, e.g. lexical,
                        syntactic, and statistical analysis; special layouts for interlinear texts;
                        synchronized scrolling of multiple translations or editions; and flexible
                        tools for searching and for organizing search results and making latent
                        patterns visible. Disparity in document formats and levels of tagging and
                        meta-information long made it difficult to share text software. And the cost
                        of software development frequently exceeds the resources available for
                        humanities computing infrastructure.
                    Thanks to SGML, XML, the TEI, and even HTML, we are now closer to having a
                        uniform way to exchange information about documents and their structures.
                        And thanks to other existing and emergent standards, it is now possible to
                        specify a simple architecture that can help organize a modular system, into
                        which a variety of analysis, display, and other tools can be plugged. This
                        would allow independent development, maintenance, and use of far more tools
                        than could ever be handled with a monolithic approach.
                
                
                    A simple scenario
                    Consider a user viewing a large collection of texts; perhaps all the literary
                        works of a single author or period, using several tools:
                            a fully-formatted view;
                            a word list, from which searches may be issued;
                            a Key Word in Context (KWIC) view;
                            an interlinear view with grammatical, thematic, or other
                                information displayed in association with text portions.
                        
                    When the user selects a different hit in the KWIC display, the full-text view
                        might scroll to the new location; when the user selects a different word
                        from the word list, both the KWIC display and the full-text display might
                        change accordingly. Each view has its own set of configuration options.
                    Our architecture is designed to exploit several insights:
                            1. Almost all scholarly analysis tools can be construed as "views"
                                of an underlying corpus.
                            2. Little communication is required between the views. Each must
                                have efficient access to the underlying data, but individual views
                                only need communicate terse information (e.g. the new focal
                                word-type) to others when they change state.
                            3. When one view changes state, other views can respond by
                                changing their own state; the first view need not control the others. This allows the user
                                to have some KWIC or text views which respond to new selections in
                                the wordlist, and others which are unaffected. Thus, our
                                architecture decentralizes inter-view control: any view can respond
                                to others, but no view is controlled by another.
                            4. A view's response to events elsewhere may be simple (e.g.
                                scroll) or arbitrarily complex (e.g. recalculate a statistical
                                description of the text).
                        
                
                
                    Overall architecture
                    
                        The underlying data-access layer
                        The base of the system is an XML repository, which provides access to
                            application modules (views) through the W3C Document Object Model (DOM).
                            Application modules communicate directly with the XML data through the
                            repository; they need not interact intimately with each other. This
                            simplifies protocols and implementation considerably.
                        Since the repository uses standard interfaces, multiple implementations
                            can co-exist and compete on their performance, scalability, etc.
                            Ideally, the XML database should provide rapid access to large volumes
                            of data and annotation, with fundamental kinds of indexed search out of
                            which tools can build more sophisticated conjoint searches, search
                            displays, and lexicostatistical analysis tools.
                    
                    
                        The view modules
                        User interfaces to the data are built on top of the data-access layer.
                            Each typically provides a specialized view of selected data, and relates
                            to other modules as a peer. For example, a formatter might collect data
                            and apply a stylesheet, while a concordance view collects data portions
                            and lays them out to reveal lexical patterns, and a statistical analysis
                            tool analyzes selected data portions and provides a graphical or
                            numerical report.
                        Modules interact frequently but simply, via broadcast: whenever a module
                            changes its state, it tells all the other modules. Such broadcasts are
                            easily performed either on a single system or across a network; they
                            only need to contain a little information. Recipients can then respond
                            or not, as desired.
                        A broadcast message consists of a list of state variables that have
                            changed. A concordance view, for example, might broadcast changes to its
                            sort order, the current search string it uses, and the size of context
                            it displays. A word list might publish its search string and the current
                            selection. Generally, variables should be small; there is no need to
                            re-publish data from the underlying collection, which is accessible to
                            all views.
                        A module can ignore messages if it has no interest in the originating
                            view or in the particular state information. For example, a formatted
                            view may be interested when a concordance view gets a whole new search,
                            but not when it is merely re-sorted.
                        Views do not broadcast the new values of variables when they change;
                            instead, interested recipients ask originators directly about state
                            values. We believe recipients will, in general, need to be able to query
                            the state of other modules for more information than changed, even
                            though their query is triggered by a simple state change.
                        Each module, then, defines a small set of named information pieces about
                            which it will broadcast, and another set that it will expose for
                            examination or perhaps change. These variables amount to the module's
                            interface to other modules. Its interface to the user remains its
                            own.
                    
                
                
                    Summary
                    We propose here a basic architecture for interconnecting diverse,
                        decentralized text tools. Modules can thus be built by many people, yet used
                        together. This requires a very simple protocol, and we propose a broadcast
                        approach in which modules notify other ones when their visible state
                        changes, and choose when and how to respond to received notifications. This
                        fits very smoothly with existing standards such as XML, DOM, HTTP, and
                        CORBA, making it feasible cooperatively to build an extensive suite of text
                        tools. Achieving agreement on a very simple communication protocol would
                        greatly facilitate the development of an effective humanities text analysis
                        environment, by making it a cooperative rather than monolithic project, and
                        by enabling re-use of existing standards and future code modules.
                
            
        
        
            
                Partial Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                    Serge
                                    Abiteboul
                                 et al
                            Querying Documents in Object Databases
                        
                        
                            International Journal on Digital Libraries 
                            
                                1
                                1
                                5-19
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Bieber
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jiangling
                                    Wan
                                
                            
                            Backtracking in a Multiple- Window Hypertext
                                Environment
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the 1994 European Conference on
                                Hypertext
                            
                                
                                ACM
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Steven
                                    Feiner
                                
                            
                            Seeing the Forest for the Trees: Hierarchical Display
                                of Hypertext Structure
                        
                        
                            Conference on Office Information Systems. March 23-25,
                                1988, Palo Alto, CA
                            
                                New York
                                ACM Press
                                1988
                                205-212
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Gary
                                    F.
                                    Simons
                                
                            
                            A Conceptual Modeling Language for the Analysis and
                                Interpretation of Text
                        
                        
                            Committee on Text Analysis and Interpretation, document
                                AIW12, January 16
                            
                                Chicago
                                Text Encoding Initiative
                                1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Lou
                                    Burnard
                                
                            
                            Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
                                Interchange
                            
                                Chicago
                                Oxford
                                Text Encoding Initiative
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Bharathi
                                    Subramanian
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Theodore
                                    W.
                                    Leung
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Scott
                                    L.
                                    Vandenberg
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Stanley
                                    B.
                                    Zdonik
                                
                            
                            The AQUA Approach to Querying Lists and Trees in
                                Object-Oriented Databases
                        
                        
                            Presented at the International Conference on Data
                                Engineering, Taipei, Taiwan
                            
                                
                                
                                1995
                            
                        
                        Available from the authors.
                    
                
            
        
    
