


    
        
            
                Funding of Humanities Computing Projects: Grant-Making
                    Programs of U.S. Government Agencies
                
                    
                        Joyce
                        Ray
                        
                            Institute of Museum and Library Services
                            jray@imls.fed.us
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Mike
                        Sokal
                        
                            National Science Foundation 
                            msokal@nsf.gov
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Helen
                        Aguera
                        
                            National Endowment for the Humanities
                            haquera@neh.gov
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Barbard
                        Paulson
                        
                            National Endowment for the Humanities
                            bpaulson@neh.gov
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            

                
                    
                        Local Organizers' Panel
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS), The National Science
                    Foundation (NSF), and The National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) are
                    independent U.S. government agencies that promote the sciences and the
                    humanities, and strengthen libraries and museums through various funding
                    opportunities. Projects to conduct research and educational and public programs
                    are supported in several of the agencies' programs, sometimes in partnership
                    agreements. Grants are awarded for the preparation of digital libraries and
                    archives and their application to educational settings. Awards are also made for
                    the development of standards or best practices and the creation of electronic
                    resources that facilitate access to information nationally and internationally.
                    Of special interest are programs that foster partnerships among institutions and
                    disciplines.
                Representatives from these agencies will discuss the programs, goals, and
                    priorities of their agencies in support of humanities computing projects. They
                    will outline some of the most common mistakes made in applying for federal
                    support for humanities computing projects and what information should be
                    included in an application for federal funding.
            
        
    
