


    
        
            
                Challenges in the Design of Online Full-Text Databases:
                    Creating Rich Text Encoding
                
                    
                        Carole
                        E.
                        Mah
                        Women Writers Project Brown University
                            Carole_Mah@brown.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction: Encoding System Design in the Context of User-Centered
                        Design
                    Writing about the Cypress project at the University of California at
                        Berkeley, Nancy Van House et al. state that "digital libraries can be
                        described and evaluated on three key components: contents, functionality,
                        and interface"Van House, Nancy A. and Mark H. Butler, Virginia
                            Ogle, and Lisa Schiff. "User-Centered Iterative Design for Digital
                            Libraries: The Cypress Experience", D-Lib
                                Magazine, February 1996. &lt;&gt;. The writers lament the fact that of these three, contents
                        and functionality are not commonly enough evaluated. For a digital resource
                        whose function depends to a high degree on the encoding of its contents, we
                        can extend these observations and suggest that user-centered design and
                        evaluation of functionality must begin with the design of the encoding
                        system itself. This is increasingly true as the encoding system becomes more
                        complex. For a project like the Brown University Women Writers Project
                        (WWP), whose research focuses on highly detailed encoding, our central
                        problems are how to provide encoding which will support anticipated user
                        needs; how to find a delivery system which can use this encoding; and how to
                        design an interface which makes this encoding useful to the user. Since the
                        topic of user interface design deserves its own paper, and since there are
                        already many studies of that subjectBaecker, Ronald M.. Readings in human-computer interaction: toward the year
                                2000. (San Francisco, Calif.: M. Kaufmann Pub.,
                            1995.) Nielson, Jakob. "Jakob Nielson's Website (Usable
                            Information Technology)". &lt;&gt;, this paper focuses on WWP encoding decisions rather than
                        on the choice and design of the delivery systemAddressing these
                            issues deserves a separate forum. To this end, we are conducting a
                            demo/poster presentation on the technical details of our online delivery
                            system..
                    Moreover, the aforementioned studies are generalized, rather than focused on
                        humanities textbase design. Studies that do focus on humanities projects are
                        scarce, and the ones that do existIn addition to Van House
                            (cited above) see for example: Arms, Caroline R. "Historical
                            Collections for the National Digital Library: Lessons and Challenges at
                            the Library of Congress", D-Lib Magazine, May
                            1996. &lt;&gt; Seaman, David. "The User Community as Responsibility
                            and Resource", D-Lib Magazine, July/August
                            1997. &lt;&gt; Shaw, Elizabeth J. and Sarr Blumson "Making of America
                            -- Online Searching and Page Presentation at the University of
                            Michigan", D-Lib Magazine, July 1998. &lt;&gt;
                        do not specifically address the issue of how the kind of markup offered in
                        the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) Guidelines might best be utilized in
                        encoding and delivery. We are interested in exploring what components(s) of
                        TEI markup are actually necessary to fulfill scholarly user needs. For this
                        reason (and because it is not clear how much one could generalize from
                        others' studies) the WWP has performed our own assessment of users' needs
                        via beta-testing (prior to the textbase release date of August 1999) and via
                        a Mellon Foundation-funded user survey.
                
                
                    Defining "Rich" Text Encoding
                    Within the context of the TEI, the definition of "rich" encoding occurs on a
                        spectrum. The "lightest" involves transcribing from a modern standard
                        edition of a work using minimal phrase-level elements, ignoring original
                        pagination, lineation, and typography. The other extreme is to transcribe
                        several different versions of a work, marking them up so as to enable
                        collation/comparison, providing detailed analysis of handwritten
                        additions/deletions, and providing markup to enable linguistic and/or
                        metrical analysis. The WWP falls in the middle of these two extremes. We
                        provide robust phrase-level markup, preserve original errors, typography,
                        abbreviations, spelling, lineation, pagination, forme work information, and
                        basic information about handwritten additions/deletions. We also record a
                        few aspects of the original rendition (e.g., case, slant, and alignment, but
                        not kerning, leading, or type size).
                
                
                    Arguments For and Against Rich TEI Markup
                    One of the primary arguments against rich text encoding is that it exceeds
                        actual scholarly requirements, providing unnecessary detail at prohibitive
                        cost. Part of the problem with this argument is that scholarly requirements
                        vary considerably from discipline to discipline; historians may chiefly need
                        simple search and retrieval tools, while literary scholars may need features
                        which support more detailed analysis of the text. In addition, a diversity
                        of potential uses may also require more detailed encoding to accommodate
                        different needs. Thus, while scholars engaged in historical or literary
                        research value a transcription which reproduces the original lineation,
                        pagination and spelling, teachers may need a version with some degree of
                        spelling modernization or regularized typography for their students. The
                        WWP's user survey ()
                        suggests strongly that users expect the textbase to function both for
                        research and for teaching, and that they do require a transcription which
                        reproduces the basic material details of the text as well as its structure
                        and content.
                
                
                    Justifying the Cost of Rich Text Encoding
                    Very few projects provide rich, detailed markup of primary source texts
                        because the expense of this level of markup is regarded as an obstacle to
                        getting important materials online, and greater priority is given to the
                        quantity of material encoded than to the detail of the encoding. While the
                        WWP also feels these pressures, we feel that the actual added cost and
                        effort are still matters for research. Our working hypothesis is that rich
                        markup is necessary in order to provide a research environment within which
                        users feel empowered and at home. Rather than thinking of rich text markup
                        as adding levels of arcane complexity which will never be used, we feel that
                        its level of detail anticipates the users' basic expectations about how text
                        should be represented and manipulated. Therefore, from our point of view the
                        question is not how to justify the costs associated with rich text encoding
                        but rather (given that rich text encoding is a necessity) what might be the
                        best way to minimize those costs. These methods of cost minimization will be
                        addressed at length in the final version of this paper.
                
                
                    Conclusions
                    While not decisive, our user survey and beta-testing results so far confirm
                        our hypothesis that rich text markup is essential for providing a textbase
                        which is a genuinely useful teaching and research tool. Moreover, these
                        results indicate the direction future testing should take. Future evaluation
                        and design iterations must focus even more on user-centered testing and
                        evaluation. In particular, as Seaman suggests, pro-actively
                        educating users will help greatly in solving many still-unanswered
                        questions.
                
            
        
    
