


    
        
            
                Playing with the Guidelines: Topics in Text Encoding at
                    the Women Writers Project
                
                    
                        Syd
                        Bauman
                        Women Writers Project Brown University
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Erica
                        Dillon
                        Women Writers Project Brown University
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Julie
                        Desjardins
                        Women Writers Project Brown University
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Julia
                        Flanders
                        Women Writers Project Brown University
                            Julia_Flanders@brown.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The TEI Guidelines are intended to be very broad, covering the encoding of all
                    but the most unusual documents for any of a variety of purposes. Furthermore,
                    the TEI very wisely provides a mechanism for extending or modifying the DTDs
                    used to enforce the SGML encoding, thus allowing "for texts that cannot be
                    conveniently or appropriately encoded using what is provided" (P3, pg. 737).
                    These unforeseen needs have already cropped up frequently since the TEI was
                    first published, and they have spurred the ongoing research of the TEI community
                    in addressing these issues, and in considering which merit changes to TEI itself
                    and which are simply local idiosyncrasies.
                The Women Writers Project has often found it necessary to make extensive use of
                    the TEI extension mechanism in order to encode features in a way which
                    accurately represents their structure. In addition, we have found it useful to
                    specify a fuller and more explicit method of encoding rendition than is
                    described in TEI. This poster session will present several specific challenges
                    which the WWP has encountered in encoding early printed books, and the approach
                    we have taken in addressing them. We will describe our system of rendition
                    ladders, which allow an explicit pairing of keywords and values within the rend=
                    attribute provided by TEI. We will also describe our approach to encoding
                    headings and labels, notes, cast lists, and quotations that cuase overlap
                    problems, along with the specific TEI extensions we have made in support of our
                    methods.
            
        
    
