


    
        
            
                The Women Writers Project: Using Dynaweb 4.1 for Online
                    Textbase Delivery
                
                    
                        Carole
                        E.
                        Mah
                        Women Writers Project Brown University
                            Carole_Mah@brown.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The mission of the Brown University Women Writers Project is to create, develop,
                    and make accessible a state-of-the-art electronic textbase of women's writing in
                    English before 1830. The purpose of this demonstration of the premiere release
                    of our textbase is twofold:
                        to showcase our textbase in a peer forum with the expectation of peer
                            evaluation and review useful in fine-tuning or in developing future
                            releases of the textbase;
                        to share the results of our research and Dynaweb customization, with
                            the expectation that other projects may be able to apply these results
                            to their own work.
                    
                Released at the end of 1998, INSO's Dynaweb version 4.1 provides many new
                    features especially attractive to humanists. To make the potential if these
                    features apparent to humanists in a way that is not readily accessible in the
                    Dynaweb documentation, this demonstration and poster session will show not only
                    the working features in action, but will also provide documentation and code for
                    other humanist Dynaweb users on how to achieve such functionality. This new
                    functionality includes things which have been possible before in INSO's
                    stand-alone SGML browser (Dynatext) and in other web systems such as
                    OpenText/Pat, but which have heretofore not been possible in Dynaweb, such as
                    keyword-in-context (concordance) search results.
                This demonstration and poster session will require a computer with an Internet
                    connection and with at least Netscape 4.x or Internet Explorer 4.x installed.
                    The demonstration will also include both handouts and posters. Until August
                    1999, access to our textbase is free; our URL is &lt;&gt;.
            
        
    
