


    
        
            
                A Web-Based Digital Learning Environment for
                    Archaeology Students
                
                    
                        Jeanne
                        Sept
                        Anthropology Department Indiana
                                University
                            sept@indiana.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Martin
                        Siegel
                        Center For Excellence In Education Indiana
                                University
                            msiegel@indiana.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                All faculty teaching introductory survey courses in the social sciences and
                    humanities face a dilemma: how to give students a broad overview of the
                    fundamental issues in a field while at the same time engaging them in
                    problem-solving, using the analytical methods of their discipline. We are
                    exploring this pedagogical challenge in the context of introductory archaeology
                    classes. We are developing a Digital Learning Environment for use on the World
                    Wide Web (WWW) that we propose can not only transform student-teacher
                    relationships in archaeology, but also model an innovative strategy for
                    improving the quality of learning opportunities for students across a range of
                    disciplines.
                With support from a National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) and the
                    Department of Education (FIPSE) we are designing a Web-based visualization tool
                    called TimeWeb that allows students to query a complex relational database on
                    African archaeology, and examine the time/space relationships of the
                    archaeological materials that they find. Asked to evaluate the earliest farming
                    in Africa, for example, students can search for sites with dated evidence of
                    food production, such as plant remains or artifacts, and display the search
                    results chronologically on a dynamic time scale, on a choice of integrated maps,
                    or as a sortable list. They can then link from any site displayed in TimeWeb to
                    a web page that contains archaeological data and multimedia information for that
                    site. Students can use information they discover at individual sites to refine
                    their next TimeWeb research queries.
                We have done formative tests of TimeWeb in two archaeology classes, taught at
                    Indiana University during the 1998-99 academic year by J. Sept. While our
                    database is still in an early stage of development, preliminary classroom
                    results suggest that students are eager to use these web-based tools to explore
                    complex datasets for themselves. However, they initially need more structured
                    class time and digital tools to work cooperatively, both to develop team
                    strategies for problem-solving, and to integrate and interpret their research
                    results and discuss them with other members of the class. The next phase of our
                    project will be addressing these issues of curriculum and technological
                    development.
            
        
    
