


    
        
            
                Of Media, Data, Documents: An Argument for the
                    Importance of Relational Technology to the Project of Humanities
                    Computing
                
                    
                        Rafael
                        C.
                        Alvarado
                        
                            McGraw Center for Teaching and Learning
                            Princeton University
                            alvarado@princeton.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Summary
                    The idea that relational database technology is inappropriate for humanities
                        computing applications (HCA) is now commonplace. A standard argument is that
                        the allegedly two-dimensional tabular format of relational data is an
                        outmoded method of information storage that forces us to "dumb down" our
                        material (Hockey 1998). Others argue that hierarchical and object-oriented
                        structures are better suited to the modeling of sequentially arbitrary
                        format of semiotic and textual information (Simons 1997). Still others,
                        while not opposed to database technology in principle, find no use for it.
                        Such views in general do not follow from a thorough-going familiarity with
                        either the practical possibilities or theoretical implications of the
                        relational model. Far from being outmoded, the relational model--first
                        articulated by Codd in 1970 (1970) and now the foundation for a number
                        database management systems--stands as one of the few fundamental conceptual
                        innovations in the history information technology. In addition, it is one of
                        the only such technologies to avail itself fully of the hypertextual
                        properties of the digital medium. Indeed, this feature allows us to address
                        another commonplace among humanities computing specialists be addressed,
                        namely the idea that marked-up documents remain "too smart" for the tools
                        used to access them (Seaman 1998).
                    The value of the relational model to an HCA is best seen in the context of
                        the three-tiered architecture of humanities computing applications. At one
                        level, we have first-order collections of primary sources in the form of
                        digital media objects, such as electronic texts, digital images, digital
                        sounds, videos and other media types, including numeric datasets. At a
                        higher level we have the second-order interpretive and rhetorical documents
                        that result from the selection, manipulation and incorporation of
                        first-order objects into presentations of various formats, such as books,
                        slide shows, web sites, interactive programs, and virtual reality spaces.
                        Between these two levels resides a layer of metadata and tools that provide
                        access to and control over first-order media to aid scholars in the
                        production of second-order documents. I call this middle layer a "digital
                        collections management system" (DCMS).
                    From a structural perspective, an HCA is a system whereby syntagmatically
                        structured documents are transformed by various operations--pattern
                        matching, selection, sorting, collection, subtraction, addition, etc.--and
                        incorporated into other syntagmatic structures. Thus, the middle layer is
                        essentially a transformational engine. The capabilities of this engine are a
                        direct function of the operations it is able to perform.
                    One form of DCMS consists of metadata stored in the form of SGML-encoded text
                        files or in the headers of media files, which files are in turn stored in a
                        file system and indexed by a web-accessible search engine, such as OpenText.
                        There are two frequently cited advantages to this type of DCMS. The first is
                        that since the media files in a collection possess their own data,
                        information can travel with the files and thus not be tied to any DCMS. The
                        second is that the hierarchical and sequential format of SGML allows us to
                        model data in the form that it is actually found, and therefore to access
                        and work with the media in an intuitive fashion.
                    Although both of these features are useful, they possess serious drawbacks.
                        In the first case, there are good reasons for decoupling media files from
                        their metadata since, except for properties intrinsic to the digital file
                        itself--such as its size, location and format--none of the metadata itself
                        belongs to the media file. For example, all information about a media file
                        source--such as a photographic negative owned by an archive--is logically
                        independent of the derived digital file and associated with any other media
                        files derived from the same source, or which have been copied and modified
                        from an archived digital file. The non-intrinsic relationship between media
                        file and metadata is even more pronounced in the case of the
                        representational content associated with the file source--such as the
                        figures that populate a painting or text. Linking metadata to media means
                        creating redundant metadata instances, which is not only inefficient, but a
                        problem to maintain.
                    Regarding the second point, the hierarchical and syntagmatic format of
                        metadata storage is an advantage only if one is interested in performing
                        comparatively few structural transformations on the first-order material one
                        seeks to deploy in second-order works. For example, if one uses electronic
                        texts to search for extractable passages, or to build concordance files, or
                        to describe the statistical distribution of words and passages in a text or
                        corpus, the structural operations required to perform such tasks can be
                        accomplished with a standard indexing engine. However, if one is interested
                        in the systematic decomposition of texts, and in the recombination of
                        textual elements with elements drawn from other texts or from metadata
                        associated with other media objects, then the transformational requirements
                        for these operations will exceed what is provided by an indexing engine by
                        itself. For example, to conduct the kind of structural analysis of mythic
                        texts proposed by Lévi-Strauss (Lévi-Strauss 1963), one must be able to
                        describe a text in a paradigmatic, polythetic form. But it is precisely this
                        form of organization that the mark-up approach inhibits, first by its
                        emphasis on syntagm over paradigm, and second by the effective prohibition
                        of over-lapping tags.
                    It is significant that both of these problems derive from the same
                        intuitivist principles that argue against the use of the relational model.
                        For both problems can be addressed precisely to the degree that the
                        decidedly unintuitive principles of normalization are employed in the design
                        of a DCMS data model. This is because normalization forces us to analyze our
                        material, not simply describe it. In the process of defining the categories
                        and relationships associated with the materials of humanistic research, we
                        not only demystify objects by disarticulating from them the data that they
                        supposedly contain, we raise the relationships between objects to the level
                        of observation when they would otherwise remain hidden. The great advantage
                        of this work is not only that we produce a more flexible and powerful DCMS,
                        but that we produce a database that becomes an encyclopedic work in
                        itself.
                    In my talk I will illustrate these points with examples from HCAs at
                        Princeton. In doing so I will discuss the design of a DCMS that combines the
                        advantages of mark-up technologies (such as XML), relational database
                        technologies, and object-oriented application technologies.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    F.
                                    Codd
                                
                            
                            A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data
                                Banks
                        
                        
                            Communications of the ACM
                            
                                13
                                
                                377-387
                                1970
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            >
                                    S.
                                    Hockey
                                
                            Humanities Computing and Scholarship in the 21st
                                Century
                        
                        
                            A special presentation in a New York University series
                                of colloquia on uses of computers and communications, given Friday,
                                April 3 at 2 p.m. in Room 109 Warren Weaver Hall, 251 Mercer Street
                                at West 4th St.
                            
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Lévi-Strauss
                                
                            
                            Structural anthropology
                            
                                
                                    Claire
                                    Jacobson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Brooke
                                    Grundfest
                                    Schoepf
                                
                            
                            
                                New York
                                Basic Books
                                1963
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Seaman
                                
                            
                            Presentation on the Electronic Text Center at the
                                University of Virginia
                        
                        
                             A talk given the New Tools for Teaching and Research
                                Seminar at Princeton University, June 1998
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    F.
                                    Simons
                                
                            
                            Conceptual modeling versus visual modeling: a
                                technological key to building consensus
                        
                        
                            Computers in the Humanities
                            
                                30
                                
                                303-319
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
