


    
        
            
                HyperPo: The Next Generation
                
                    
                        Stéfan
                        Sinclair
                        Department of French Queen's University
                            4ss42@qsilver.queensu.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                         "Only, perhaps, when hypertext or something like it begins to open
                            our eyes to startling truths about some body of text, truths that were
                            totally imperceptible before, may we expect a significant attempt of
                            synthesis or any substantial shift toward the computer as a major tool
                            of humanistic study."
                        (Raben, p. 349)
                    
                
                Since the sophistication and wider implementation of Graphical User Interfaces
                    (GUI) in the early 1990's, the prodigious diffusion of Hypertext has conduced a
                    dizzying array of experiments and applications, guides and theories. Granted,
                    many important foundations date back to prior years, decades centuries and even
                    millennia - at least as far back as Vannever Bush's description of his Memex
                    machine (1945) and Ted Nelson's 1965 coining of the word "hypertext" - but the
                    more recent profusion of hypertextual technology has allowed a great pooling of
                    resources that has combined the creative and innovative forces of many people
                    from diverse disciplines. It's of no surprise, then, that hypertext has seen
                    itself successfully woven into the fabric of objectives as disparate as
                    pedagogy, retail and literary writing. Literary criticism, however, is one
                    discipline where the hypertextual paradigm has been almost absent (TACTweb is a
                    rare notable exception). This is all the more surprising, I think, since
                    literary criticism stands to benefit substantially from certain possibilities
                    offered by hypertext. Time and again colleagues have commented on the
                    regrettable chasm that continues to exist, methodologically, between the text to
                    be analysed and the data produced to help analyse it (retrospectives on
                    computing in the humanities such as those by Raben and Potter invariably invoke
                    this impediment). This paper will present the latest version of HyperPo (Hypertexte potentiel), a Web-based application intended, among other
                    things, to bridge the gap between text and data by fully exploiting the
                    hypertext paradigm (HyperPo is available at ).
                It needs to be asserted from the outset that HyperPo is as much a tool for text
                    exploration as a program for text analysis (a fundamental characteristic
                    enshrined in its full name "HyperPo: Text Analysis and Exploration Software").
                    In fact, HyperPo strives to blur the distinction between exploration and
                    analysis with two related strategies: (1) the superimposition of text and data
                    through typographical schemes (2) the tight integration of text and data through
                    hypertextual links. The act of reading the text and the acts of producing and
                    analysing data are all collapsed into a flexible exploratory and experimental
                    activity that assumes the modalities desired by the particular
                    reader/user/researcher (these distinctions are of course also blurred).
                In essence, HyperPo is an extensible text reading program. The first-time user
                    can have HyperPo display an electronic text with little or no supplementary
                    information (in a format that would seem comforting and familiar), and
                    progressively add types of textual information deemed potentially interesting or
                    useful. I see this incremental approach to computer-assisted literary criticism
                    as a crucial step if it is to gain wider acceptance. No longer must the
                    traditional literary critic make a daunting leap of faith away from her text and
                    towards a new world of quantitative analytical tools; she can stroll around on
                    relatively familiar ground and, in time, explore and claim new territories as
                    she sees fit. Although HyperPo's user-friendliness doesn't come at the expense
                    of utility and power, it should be conceded that all of its text analysis
                    functions (frequency, distribution, cooccurrence, KWIC lists, etc.) are
                    available from other programs. What is novel, and epistemologically significant
                    (in ways that will be defined and elaborated), is the possibility of dynamically
                    generating text and data intertwined in a rich web of associated
                    information.
                Given that HyperPo is freely available as a web-based program -- which, among
                    other advantages, eliminates the need for the user to install and update
                    software other than a browser -- I will forego a detailed description of the
                    software in favour of a brief account of its major features and a somewhat
                    hypothetical presentation of it in action with an excerpt of Georges Perec's
                        La Disparition. (My work on the play between
                    literary game and violence in La Disparition will be a
                    secondary preoccupation in this context. Although I heed the warnings of
                    colleagues to not concentrate on the tools of criticism at the expense of proper
                    literary scholarship, I think that HyperPo represents a sufficiently significant
                    shift in methodology that the process of hypertextually
                    driven exploration merits full consideration and elaboration. See my ACH-ALLC'97
                    summary for an apologia of Oulipian texts in my corpus).
                As one would expect, the absence of the letter 'e' in Perec's lipogrammatical
                    novel La Disparition severely limits the use of the
                    primary feminine morphological marker in nouns and adjectives of French. This in
                    turn further limits an already deleted vocabulary, encouraging recourse to
                    foreign and unusual words («la Star» and «la Squaw»), unorthodox paraphrases («pli labial» for une
                    lèvre) and aberrant syntactical forms («un Roman
                        Jakobson qui nous dirait son structural avis» -- the strange
                    anteposition of the adjectif masks how Perec avoids more common forms such as
                    «structuralisme» or «structuraliste»). In fact, the lipogrammatical constraint
                    propagates itself through successive textual levels: the graphemic, the
                    morphemic, the lexical, the syntactical, the textual and the semantic (the
                    precise meaning and order of these are obviously open to discussion).
                By representing parts of speech or repetition information directly in the text
                    (through a chosen colour scheme), by linking together text based on this
                    information, by providing the means to generate KWIC, distribution and
                    coocurence lists, and finally, by linking words to outside resources such as the
                    Altavista search engine and the ARTFL Frequency database, HyperPo provides the
                    means of exploring different stylistic strategies present in La
                        Disparition and indeed in any text. Figure 1 shows a screen shot of
                    HyperPo where the relative frequency of repeating series of two words are shown
                    in increasing hues of grey in the text of the top left frame, the list of
                    repeating series of words in alphabetic order are shown in the top right frame,
                    the distribution of pouvoir is shown in the bottom
                    left frame, and other information is indicated in the status bar.
                
                    Figure 1
                
                As always, HyperPo is about making readily available a relatively powerful but
                    easy-to-use tool for text exploration and analysis; one that fully exploits the
                    hypertextual paradigm. Despite progress, much frustration has resulted in
                    Humanities Computing from trying to make computers do things that they can't
                    (yet?) do. HyperPo recognizes the respective strengths of humans and computers
                    and attempts to maximise the collaboration through hypertext.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Vannevar
                                    Bush
                                
                            
                            As We May Think
                        
                        
                            Atlantic Monthly
                            
                                176
                                
                                101-108
                                1945
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Georges
                                    Perec
                                
                            
                            La Disparition
                            
                                Paris
                                Denoël
                                1969
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Rosanne
                                    G.
                                    Potter
                                
                            
                            Statistical Analysis of Literature: A Retrospective on
                                Computers and the Humanities, 1966-1990
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                25
                                6
                                401-429
                                December 1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Joseph
                                    Raben
                                
                            
                            Humanities Computing 25 Years Later
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                25
                                6
                                341-350
                                December 1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Stéfan
                                    Sinclair
                                
                            
                            L'HyperPo: Exploration des structures lexicales à
                                l'aide des formes hypertextuelles
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Greg
                                    Lessard
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Levison
                                
                            
                            ACH-ALLC '97 Conference Abstracts
                            
                                Kingston, ON
                                Queen's University Press
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
