


    
        
            
                Assessing, Digitizing, and Delivering Library
                    Collections: Scoping Oxford's Resources
                
                    
                        Stuart
                        Lee
                        
                            Centre for Humanities Computing
                            stuart.lee@oucs.ox.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                In 1998 the University of Oxford, funded by the A W Mellon foundation, initiated
                    a scoping study into its digitization activities -- past, present, and future.
                    The report aimed:
                        to document, analyse and evaluate Oxford's current digitization
                            activities, as a basis for assessing the effectiveness of the various
                            methodologies used;
                        to investigate the possibilities for building on the existing
                            project-based work and for migrating it into viable services for library
                            users;
                        to develop appropriate selection criteria for creating digital
                            collections in the context of local, national, and international
                            scholarly requirements for digital library products and services;
                        to make recommendations for further investment and activity within the
                            Oxford libraries sector and potentially within the UK research libraries
                            community.
                    
                This paper will outline the methodology used by the study and present its
                    findings. In particular it will outline the following: 
                        Survey of potential projects - The study formulated a series of
                            questionnaires and interview sheets for use with existing digitization
                            projects, and potential digitization projects. These, and the subsequent
                            results, will be outlined.
                        Assessing projects - The paper will present some of the problems in
                            assessing a collection for digitization using appropriate case studies
                            from the colleges and libraries at Oxford.
                        Digitization, Metadata, and Access - The study performed a reasonably
                            detailed analysis of activities (both within Oxford and outside of
                            Oxford) related to the digitization process used, the metadata systems,
                            and the access procedures. These will be outlined in the paper with
                            appropriate references to further readings.
                        Workflows and Business Plans - The study was asked to produce a robust
                            set of assessment criteria for digitization projects as well as a full
                            business plan and model for an on-demand digitization service for the
                            University. In addition it was asked to expand this to a digitization
                            service that could manage project sized collections. Using the services
                            of the Higher Education Digitization Service (UK) these have been
                            produced and will be outlined in the talk.
                    
                Above all this paper seeks to outline the procedures adopted by the study and the
                    recommendations Oxford has derived from it, with the hope that these will be of
                    use to other institutions who are seeking to set up a digitization service, or
                    to move their reprographics unit into the digital age.
                The study was conducted by Stuart D Lee, Head of the Centre for Humanities
                    Computing, University of Oxford, and was overseen by a project steering
                    group.
            
        
    
