


    
        
            
                The Pragmatics of Publishing a Scholarly Electronic
                    Journal
                
                    
                        R.
                        G.
                        Siemens
                        Department of English University of
                                Alberta
                            Raymond.Siemens@UAlberta.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The computer -- specifically, the recent advance in methods of electronic
                    dissemination brought forth by recent computing technologies -- has been seen by
                    some as a saviour to the scholarly publishing world. We need only consider the
                    intellectual milieu that spawned the collection Scholarly
                        Journals at the Crossroads: A Subversive Proposal for Electronic
                        Publishing (O'Donnell and Okerson, eds.) some years ago, in 1995, to
                    recognize this. The idea of the "subversive proposal" around which that
                    collection was constructed was put forward several years earlier by Stevan
                    Harnad, editor of the electronic journal Psycholoquy;
                    given voice by many since its presentation, the subversive proposal is
                    essentially this: instead of sending articles and book manuscripts to
                    traditional academic journals and publishers, scholars should distribute their
                    work free via the internet through electronic journals and scholar-managed
                    archives.
                Combined with advances in computing technology and infrastructure, as well as
                    what we might refer to as the ongoing "technologising of the reader," such
                    thinking has caused a fundamental shift in focus of discussions surrounding
                    scholarly publishing in the electronic medium. On the whole, discussion on this
                    topic is no longer concerned with questioning if such publication will, can, or
                    should exist, nor does it today look to the future for such publication to
                    arrive; rather, debate now concerns itself with issues that take for granted
                    both the existence and the potentially positive role of electronic publications
                    in the scholarly community. That said, discussion and debate rarely includes a
                    treatment of the pragmatic necessities involved in establishing and maintaining
                    those electronic publications.
                My intention in this paper is, thus, not to map out the history of thoughts and
                    ideas surrounding electronic publication, nor to provide a statement of its
                    relevance. Rather, my paper focuses on something that is less often addressed:
                    the more basic, but absolutely essential, activities necessary for one to
                    publish electronically.
                Drawing on my experience as founder (1994) and editor of the electronic journal
                        Early Modern Literary Studies (EMLS), my talk will
                    outline a number of pragmatic concerns and some specific difficulties inherent
                    in the production of a scholarly electronic journal. Topics to be covered in my
                    paper include the establishment of the journal; the editorial efforts involved;
                    distribution of work, and working with a widely-dispersed editorial group;
                    submissions, peer-review, and publication preparations; the evolution of our
                    publication and data-management techniques over a 5 year period; markup; how
                        EMLS monitors readership; how we respond to
                    readership patterns and reader feedback on the site; the ability to sustain such
                    an electronic journal, long-term; some impediments to electronic publication, at
                    the local level and beyond; economic and funding considerations; issues of
                    indexing and copyright; and others. More generally, I will also address several
                    concerns that become apparent when one explicitly considers the pragmatic needs
                    of the scholarly community that such publication seeks, ideally, to serve.
                The journal, EMLS, has as its focus the literature in
                    English of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Entering its fifth year of
                    publication in 1999, it has served well in excess of half a million 'documents'
                    -- papers, reviews, notes, announcements, and so forth -- to a group consisting
                    of some 3,500 regular readers and ten times that number in occasional browsers;
                    readers access the journal via the internet, at , as well as its mirror site at
                    Oxford U and its archive at the National Library of Canada. EMLS is indexed by the MLA International
                        Bibliography, the Modern Humanities Research Association's Annual Bibliography of English Language and Literature,
                    and a number of other services and databases.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Eyal
                                    Amiran
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Elaine
                                    Orr
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    John
                                    Unsworth
                                
                            
                            Refereed Electronic Journals and the Future of
                                Scholarly Publishing
                        
                        
                            Advances in Library Automation and Networking
                            
                                4
                                
                                25-54
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Early Modern Literary Studies
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Stevan
                                    Harnad
                                
                            
                            The PostGutenberg Galaxy
                        
                        
                            Times Higher Education Supplement
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                May 12, 1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Stevan
                                    Harnad
                                
                            
                            Post-Gutenberg Galaxy: The Fourth Revolution in the
                                Means of Production of Knowledge
                        
                        
                            Public-Access Computer Systems Review
                            
                                2
                                1
                                39-53
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Stevan
                                    Harnad
                                
                            
                            Publicly Retrievable Ftp Archives for Esoteric Science
                                and Scholarship: A Subversive Proposal
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt; .
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Stevan
                                    Harnad
                                
                            
                            Scholarly Skywriting and the Prepublication Continuum
                                of Scientific Inquiry
                        
                        
                            Psychological Science
                            
                                1
                                
                                342-343
                                1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Internet Economics
                        
                        
                            [A special issue of the]
                            Journal of Electronic Publishing
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                1996
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            JEP Economics 102: Current Thinking on the Economics of
                                Electronic Publishing
                        
                        
                            [A special issue of the]
                            Journal of Electronic Publishing
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    L.
                                    O'Donnell
                                
                            
                            Electronic Journals: Scholarly Invariants in a Changing
                                Medium
                        
                        
                            Scholarly Publishing
                            
                                26
                                
                                183-99
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    James
                                    J.
                                    O'Donnell
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Ann
                                    Okerson
                                
                            
                            Scholarly Journals at the Crossroads: A Subversive
                                Proposal for Electronic Publishing
                            
                                Washington, DC
                                Association of Research Libraries
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Proceedings of the 1993 International Conference on
                                Refereed Electronic Journals
                            
                                Winnipeg, MB
                                University of Manitoba Libraries
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Words from the Wise: Lessons Learned in Electronic
                                Publishing
                        
                        
                            [A special issue of the]
                            Journal of Electronic Publishing
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;.
                    
                
            
        
    
