


    
        
            
                Electronic Archives: Creating a New Bibliographic
                    Code
                
                    
                        Jennie
                        Evenson
                        Department of English Language and Literature University of Michigan
                            jevenson@umich.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Electronic archives have two distinct bibliographic codes: that of the original
                    texts in the archive, and that of the archive itself. With the rise of
                    bibliographic code scholarship among textual theorists such as Jerome McGann and
                    Peter Shillingsburg, editors can no longer assume that the new bibliographic
                    code produced by the design and apparatus of electronic archives is transparent
                        George Bornstein, "Beyond Codex Editing: A Prototype for the
                        Hypermedia Yeats Project," in Yeats: An Annual of Critical
                            and Textual Studies, vol. XIV, ed. Richard J. Finneran (Ann
                        Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996), especially pp. 50-51. Please see
                        the chapter titled "What is Critical Editing?" written by Jerome McGann,
                            The Textual Condition (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
                        University Press, 1991), especially p. 57 for a discussion of bibliographic
                        codes. See Jerome McGann, "The Rationale of Hypertext," 6 May 1995, &lt;&gt; (2 Dec 1998). Also
                        by Jerome McGann, see "The Rossetti Archive and Image-Based Electronic
                        Editing," in The Literary Text in the Digital Age,
                        ed. Richard J. Finneran (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996)
                        145-84; "Rossetti's Iconic Page," in The Iconic Page in
                            Manuscript, Print, and Digital Culture, ed. George Bornstein and
                        Theresa Tinkle (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998) 123-40; and
                        "The Complete Writings and Pictures of Dante Gabriel Rossetti: A Hypermedia
                        Research Archive," TEXT 7 (1994): 95-105. Also,
                        please see Peter Shillingsburg, Scholarly Editing in the
                            Computer Age (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996);
                        "Polymorphic, Polysemic, Protean, Reliable, Electronic Texts," in Palimpsest: Editorial Theory in the Humanities, ed.
                        George Bornstein and Ralph G. Williams (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
                        Press, 1993) 29-43; and Peter Shillingsburg, "Principles for Electronic
                        Archives, Scholarly Editions, and Tutorials," in The
                            Literary Text in the Digital Age, ed. Richard J. Finneran (Ann
                        Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996) 23-36.. The purpose of
                    this paper is to distinguish between the two bibliographic codes in electronic
                    archives and to identify some of the ways these new bibliographic codes reflect
                    modern editorial decisions and interpretations of the text. Issues of copyright
                    limitations, rapidly obsolescent technology, visual privileging of hyperlinks,
                    constructed searching, and economic and political associations of software focus
                    the discussion of electronic archives on the visual display of information.
                Jerome McGann created and helped design the first demonstration model of the
                    Rossetti Archive at the Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities at
                    the University of Virginia in 1993Please see the Jerome McGann, "The
                        Rossetti Archive," Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities,
                            &lt;&gt; (2 Dec
                        1998).. The images of manuscripts and paintings are blurry and
                    difficult to read. The bibliographic code in the Rossetti
                        Archive reveals that it was created several years ago. Rapid
                    improvements in digital imaging technology preclude longevity of quality for the
                    bibliographic code preserved in images. The level of imaging technology within
                    the archive, then, begins to carry meaning. The visual display of images also
                    shapes the meanings of the text. The Electronic Beowulf
                    shows a number of independent images from the text of Beowulf, including that of
                    Beowulf's battle with Grendel in an historiated letterSee Kevin S.
                        Kiernan, "The Electronic Beowulf," The British Library Board, &lt;&gt; (2 Dec
                        1998), especially the section "Digital Preservation, Restoration, and
                        Dissemination of Medieval Manuscripts," &lt;&gt; (9 Dec
                        1998).. The thumbnail image of the manuscript is cropped to place the
                    focus on the violent action in the drawing, highlighting the battle portion of
                    the text with images. The full image is relegated to another screen. The
                    cropping of the image and displacement of the original text exposes the modern
                    editorial interpretation of the manuscript.
                Hypertext pervades the design of electronic archives. Because hypertext is often
                    underlined and a different color than the surrounding text, hypertext is
                    visually disruptiveFor a discussion of electronic medium typography,
                        please see Jay David Bolter, "Topographic Writing: Hypertext and the
                        Electronic Writing Space," in Hypermedia and Literary
                            Studies, ed. Paul Delany and George P. Landow (Cambridge,
                        London: MIT Press, 1991) 105-18. Also see the chapter titled "Hypertext and
                        Critical Theory" in George P. Landow, Hypertext 2.0: The
                            Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology
                        (Baltimore, London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997) 33-45..
                    The color distraction of hyperlinks gains the semantic value of privilege.
                    Information about archives often consists of text and hypertext combined, as in
                    the Electronic Dickinson ArchiveSee Martha
                        Nell Smith, et al., "Dickinson Electronic Archive," Institute for Advanced
                        Technology in the Humanities, 1998, &lt;&gt; (2 Dec
                        1998).. The word "alabaster" is highlighted repeatedly within the
                    site, emphasizing this word and all its connotations of whiteness, purity,
                    frailty, and most importantly, femininity. If one of the purposes of the archive
                    was to take Dickinson's manuscripts from their pure, removed existence and to
                    make visible the "paste marks, stains, pinholes, and gradations between pencil
                    and pen" of the manuscripts, then highlighting this word works against this
                    purpose See the discussion of the Dickinson archive in Martha Nell
                        Smith, et al., "Dickinson Electronic Archive," Institute for Advanced
                        Technology in the Humanities, 1998, &lt;&gt; (2 Dec 1998).
                        Also see "The Importance of a Hypermedia Archive of Dickinson's Creative
                        Work," The Emily Dickinson Journal IV.1 (1995): 77
                        and "Corporealizations of Dickinson and Interpretive Machines," in The Iconic Page in Manuscript, Print, and Digital
                            Culture, ed. George Bornstein and Theresa Tinkle (Ann Arbor:
                        University of Michigan Press, 1998) 195-222.. In addition, copyright
                    limits electronic archives. Despite intentions of disseminating the visual
                    aspects of Dickinson's work, the archive is riddled with the difficulties of
                    constructing a complete electronic archive under copyright law. The lack of
                    complete materials impacts every aspect of the archive-from access to materials
                    to searching-and the user will only be able to view what is available.
                The searching and navigation systems of the electronic archive also influence the
                    information available to the user. Search engines function as part of the
                    navigation system and as part of the indexing process. Results given by the
                    index and the search engine determine what information will be found and used;
                    as such, it influences what the user views in the electronic archive. Editors
                    encode decisions within the tags that are administered in the textual mark up
                    process; that is, the editors chose tags and decide how the tags will be used
                        Robin C. Cover and Peter M. W. Robinson, "Encoding Textual
                        Criticism," Computers in the Humanities 29 (1995):
                        123-36. Also see Peter M. W. Robinson, "Collation, Textual Criticism,
                        Publication, and the Computer," TEXT 7 (1994):
                        77-94; C. M. Sperberg-McQueen, "Textual Criticism and the Text Encoding
                        Initiative," in The Literary Text in the Digital
                            Age, ed. Richard J. Finneran (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
                        Press, 1996) 37-62; John Lavagnino, "Completeness and Adequacy in Text
                        Encoding," in The Literary Text in the Digital Age,
                        ed. Richard J. Finneran (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996)
                        63-76; and Susan Hockey, "Creating and Using Electronic Editions," in The Literary Text in the Digital Age, ed. Richard J.
                        Finneran (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996)..
                    Information returned on a search reflects these choices. A search engine, as
                    part of the standard apparatus, is constructed and thus shapes the indexing of
                    the electronic archive.
                The markup language and computer programs aid in constructing the layout of the
                    archive. Like a printer's colophon, the computer language used by the archive
                    can encode certain meanings. Each language-from SGML to Java-is owned by a
                    company and carries political currency. Sun Microsystems, the owner of the
                    computer language Java, has been embroiled in legal battles with Microsoft over
                    the usage of Java See the chapter titled "The Politics of Hypertext:
                        Who Controls the Text?" in George P. Landow, Hypertext 2.0:
                            The Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology
                        (Baltimore, London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997) 267-300 and
                        David Silverman, "SGML and the Future of Electronic Documents," Wired 3.08 (1995), &lt;&gt; (8 Dec
                        1998).. One of the results of this dispute is that Microsoft's Web
                    browser Explorer does not support certain sections of Java applications. The
                        William Blake Archive uses Java in some sections of
                    the archive to support the image functionsSee Morris Eaves, Robert
                        Essick and Joseph Viscomi, "The William Blake Archive," Institute for
                        Advanced Technology in the Humanities, &lt;&gt; (2 Dec 1998).. These
                    sections of the archive application written in Java encounter problems on the
                    Macintosh computer, which uses a operating system that competes with the systems
                    created by Sun Microsystems and MicrosoftPlease see the discussion
                        of known technical difficulties at Morris Eaves, Robert Essick and Joseph
                        Viscomi, "The William Blake Archive," Institute for Advanced Technology in
                        the Humanities, &lt;&gt; (2 Dec
                        1998).. Computer languages used to structure the archive can carry an
                    economic and political charge, with consequences that affect the bibliographic
                    code of the archive. Like the political associations of the Dun Emer (Cuala)
                    Press discussed by Jerome McGann in Black Riders, the
                    computer language that produces the archive text and images transfers
                        associationJerome McGann, Black Riders: The
                            Visible Language of Modernism (Princeton: Princeton University
                        Press, 1993)..
                Editorial decisions encode interpretation in all mediums, including the
                    electronic medium. Each electronic representation of archival material is a new
                    scholarly edition, and as such is a new performance of the text. The overall
                    design, including background color, typeface, and spacing may seem to hold only
                    aesthetic value, but visual schemes in the electronic medium garner structure
                    and meaningSee the discussion of visual value of design in the
                        electronic medium in the chapter titled "Graphic Rhetoric" by Jay David
                        Bolter, Writing Space: The Computer, Hypertext, and the
                            History of Writing (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
                        1991), 78.. Dust jackets, which were once thrown out by collectors as
                    an unimportant or "expendable" part of the book according to James L. W. West
                    III, are currently being reviewed for their "effect on interpretation" and how
                    the "images become yoked to works for long periods of time"James L.
                        W. West III, "The Iconic Dust Jacket: Fitzgerald and Styron," in The Iconic Page in Manuscript, Print, and Digital
                            Culture, ed. George Bornstein and Theresa Tinkle (Ann Arbor:
                        University of Michigan Press, 1998), 269.. Like dust jackets, the
                    overall design of the electronic archive has the potential to impact the users'
                    experience of the work. Recognizing that the new bibliographic code created by
                    electronic archives often reflect modern editorial decisions and interpretations
                    of the text will help editors of electronic archives ask the right questions
                    about the presentation of information. Editors, therefore, need to move toward
                    understanding the new bibliographic code of archive presentation in the
                    electronic medium, and move away from assumptions that the electronic archive
                    environment is static and transparent.
            
        
    
