


    
        
            
                We Built it. Can They?: Text Encoding and the
                    Humanities Scholar
                
                    
                        Hope
                        Greenberg
                        Academic Computing University of
                                Vermont
                            hope.greenberg@uvm.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virgiinia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Text Encoding Initiative's "Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
                    Interchange" has had a profound impact on the innovators and early adopters of
                    the electronic text world. Given the technical difficulties associated with
                    creating these documents, it is not surprising that early adopters have tended
                    to be large groups with resources to devote exclusively to these projects.
                But is there a compelling pedagogical benefit to individual humanities scholar in
                    creating TEI-encoded electronic texts? Should individual scholars be creators or
                    simply consumers?
                The University of Vermont is exploring these questions. With volunteer and
                    student help, the Special Collections Department of the University's Bailey/Howe
                    Library is digitizing their Finding Aids using the EAD DTD and building a page
                    image and transcription collection of selected works using the TEI DTD and Model
                    Editions Partnership (MEP) DTD.
                Individual faculty and student projects underway include a page image backed by
                    indexed OCR'd text edition of Godey's Lady's Book, the popular 19th century
                    American magazine, as well as more deeply encoded editions of various works.
                    Faculty workshops and an undergraduate course are also proposed, the resulting
                    projects to be included in the University's electronic text collections.
                For these projects the questions kept at the forefront are: can this model be
                    duplicated by individuals or small groups with limited resources while remaining
                    in concert with the broader text encoding world?
                The assumption that because early adopters have created electronic texts, a
                    majority of humanities scholars will or should do so, represents a large chasm.
                    Unless the scholarly and pedagogical benefits derived from the creation, rather
                    than just the consumption, of these texts is sufficient to offset the difficulty
                    of undertaking such projects, that chasm may remain unbridgeable.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Chesnutt
                                
                            
                            The Model Editions Partnership--Towards a National
                                Database
                        
                        
                            Paper presented at the ACH/ALLC Joint Conference,
                                1997
                            
                                
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                        Available online: &lt;&gt;
                    

                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    William
                                    H.
                                    Geoghegan
                                
                            
                            Whatever Happened to Instructional Technology?
                        
                        
                            Paper presented at the 22nd Annual Conference of the
                                International Business Schools Computing Association, Baltimore, MD,
                                1994
                            
                                
                                
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Geoffrey
                                    A.
                                    Moore
                                
                            
                            Crossing the Chasm
                            
                                New York
                                Harper Business
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Everett
                                    M.
                                    Rogers
                                
                            
                            The Diffusion of Innovations
                            
                                NY
                                The Free Press
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Perry
                                    Willett
                                
                            
                            Issues in Project Cooperation II: Markup Issues
                        
                        
                            Presented at the ACH/ALLC Joint Conference,
                                1998
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        Available online: &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            University of Vermont Electronic Text
                                Collections
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        currently at &lt;&gt; and &lt;&gt;.
                            Both moving to &lt;&gt; in late
                            spring of 1999.
                    
                
            
        
    
