


    
        
            
                From text analysis to reception analysis: A change of
                    paradigms in Literary Computing ?
                
                    
                        Jan
                        Christoph
                        Meister
                        Literaturwissenschaftliches Seminar University
                                of Hamburg
                            jan-c-meister@rrz.uni-hamburg.de
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    I. Computing the text, computing the mind
                    Most computational studies of Literary texts make use of either of two
                        methodologies: quantitative or qualitative analysis. Though in both cases
                        the Literary text is our point of departure, quantitative and qualitative
                        analysis effectively deal with two distinct types of preprocessed textual
                        database. The quantitative analysis of "raw" textual data relies on a descriptive mark-up of elements (words) and base
                        structures (sentences) in terms of grammatical categories and functions.
                        Qualitative analysis, on the other hand, necessitates a degree of
                        higher-level hermeneutic mark-up. Theoretical
                        models of the human interpretive faculty developed in cognitive science
                        offer some fascinating insight into the complexity of this activity, but
                        they also make quite clear that for the time being, practical models or
                        algorithms attempting to simulate the human understanding of texts
                        presuppose the strict delimitation of pragmatic context. For technological
                        and methodological reasons computer based research into qualitative textual
                        aspects cannot shy away from being reductionist: If you want to compute, you
                        first have to translate the analogous into the digital. But it is naïve to
                        believe that digitization would eradicate or neutralize meaning -- a raised
                        finger will always point at something: a potential object as well as a
                        logical subject of signification. The fact therefore remains that any
                        mark-up -- and particularly the one designed to capture higher-level
                        semantic structures - will eventually transgress deductive categorical
                        classification. At some stage in Literary Computing, we are no longer
                        computing texts -- we are computing our own mind. A dilemma? A chance!
                        Rather than enforcing ever stricter, less ambiguous mark-up conventions we
                        should perhaps consider advocating flexibility, shifting our focus from text
                        to reception analysis.
                
                
                    II. "Parsing for the theme" -- an experiment
                    I would like to illustrate the above thesis by way of a recently conducted
                        experiment. It was motivated by an attempt to sketch out a functionalist
                        definition of the concept of "theme". Three alternatives for this definition
                        have been discussed in recent contributions toward a new theory of "theme":
                        The generative ("theme" as a pre-script and frame of reference for the
                        production of a text); the cognitive ("theme" as a cognitive construct
                        enabling readers to integrate various aspects of informational content in a
                        text); finally the intertextual ("theme" as a universal shared among various
                        texts).
                    Can these aspects be integrated? I tried to look at how a "theme" construct
                        is taking shape in the course of reception, and whether any correlative to
                        the thematic hypothesis produced by a reader can be identified in the
                        textual material by way of computational text analysis. This involved a two
                        stage experiment based on an excerpt from Caroll's "Alice in Wonderland".
                        Comparing the findings gathered from a sample of reading protocols on the
                        one hand (stage 1), and from the basic statistical analysis of the textual
                        word material on the other (stage 2) the data did indeed suggest that there
                        is a significant correlation between peak readings of thematic categories in
                        reader protocols, and high frequency words and word clusters (collocates and
                        maximal phrases) in the textual database.
                
                
                    III. In search of the improbable
                    The example shows that comparative studies of text and reception data may
                        indeed offer an interesting methodological alternative to purely
                        quantitative or qualitative analyses. But the suggestion to re-focus our
                        attention from text to reception analysis would have far reaching
                        consequences for Literary Computing. To quote Karl R.Popper (1984:29; my
                        translation): "The provability of a theory goes hand in hand with its
                        information content, that is, with its improbability. ... Therefore, the
                        better or more preferable hypothesis is often the more improbable one."
                    Surely if there is any point in advocating a change of paradigms in Literary
                        Computing it must be for the sake of the more meaningful, the more
                        enlightening results one hopes to achieve. Yet paradoxically enough it might
                        well be the logically -- and numerically - more "improbable" that we need to
                        consider more carefully. Our pretense to objectivity would have to
                        emancipate itself from the empirical and re-incorporate the speculative
                        dynamics of reading and interpretation once again. Can Literary Computing --
                        or Humanities Computing for that matter -- accept this risk?
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Claude
                                    Bremond
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Joshua
                                    Landy
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    Pavel
                                
                            
                            Thematics. New Approaches
                            
                                Albany
                                SUNY Press
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Karl
                                    R.
                                    Popper
                                
                            
                            Objektive Erkenntnis. Ein evolutionärer Entwurf 
                            
                                Gütersloh
                                Bertelsmann
                                1984
                            
                        
                        The original English version was published under the title Objective Knowledge, Oxford (Clarendon Press) 1972
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
