


    
        
            
                Henrik Ibsen meets text encoding - again
                
                    
                        Espen
                        Smith
                        Ore
                        HIT-Centre University of Bergen
                            Espen.Ore@hit.uib.no
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Hilde
                        Bøe
                        Center for Ibsen Studies University of
                                Oslo
                            hilde.boe@ub.uio.no
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Ingrid
                        Falkenberg
                        Center for Ibsen Studies University of
                                Oslo
                            i.l.falkenberg@ub.uio.no
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jon
                        Gunnar
                        Jørgensen
                        Center for Ibsen Studies University of
                                Oslo
                            j.g.jorgensen@inl.uio.no
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Henrik Ibsen's collected writings will be published in a new scholarly
                        edition in Norway. These writings consist of all that is written by Ibsen;
                        drama, poetry, letters, drafts etc. A group of national Norwegian
                        institutions collaborate on this project. The Norwegian Research Council is
                        the main founder. Approximately 90 people will work on the project over a
                        period of ten years, having started in 1998. Results and products from the
                        project will be made available as soon as they are completed for
                        publication.
                    The project will produce both a printed edition and an electronic version.
                        There will probably be more than one electronic version. Some versions may
                        be similar to the printed edition, while others might be different in
                        content and organisation. All material will be stored in an electronic
                        archive. This will make it possible to produce editions for different users,
                        by applying a selection and extraction mechanism and filters to the archive
                        - or by setting up windows into the data.
                
                
                    Data complexity
                    The project generates new texts based on source texts. Source texts include
                        all known manuscripts in Ibsen's own hand, all first editions of his works
                        and all untranslated editions published while Ibsen was still alive. In
                        addition to this manuscript-material is material from copywriters. All
                        variant readings between the source texts will be shown in a variant
                        apparatus in the main printed edition. The electronic archive should hold
                        enough infomation to allow any one of the source texts to be used as a basis
                        text where the other texts are variants and could be presented as such in an
                        apparatus.
                    Specialists in various fields make factual and historical annotations as well
                        as notes on vocabulary and language use not found in standard college
                        dictionaries. The annotations will inform today's international readers
                        without interpreting the author's writings from the distant years of
                        1848-1906.
                    The annotation in a traditional printed edition is sequential and not
                        repetitive. The first time a phenomenon requires a comment in a sequential
                        reading, it will be commented. The next time, and later, when this
                        phenomenon reappears, it will usually occur with reference to the earlier
                        note, and possibly not commented at all. Electronic presentation will be
                        different, annotation can be made with advanced cross-references in various
                        ways, as long as there is a suitable linking mechanism.
                    All (relevant) comments will be linked to the various existing versions
                        stored in the archive. Our project considers the first editions as main
                        texts, and it would be natural to connect comments to these. But we are not
                        blind to the fact that other projects follow other principles. When
                        constructing an electronic archive, wishing it to be of value to others, we
                        will therefore take care that the data are properly organized and with
                        sufficient inter-textual links to be of use also by editors following other
                        principles than those used in this project, including future scholars. For
                        our general digital Ibsen archive this means that we must be able to link
                        primary and secondary texts. This will be detailed, allowing any of the
                        stored versions of a work, or variants of a text, to be extracted with the
                        necessary apparatus and comments.
                
                
                    When are two texts the same?
                    The Ibsen project wishes to show the texts genetic: our aim is to show
                        variations from the first draft to the final printed text (Kynde, 98). As we
                        wish to build a general electronic Ibsen archive - "the total Ibsen" - we
                        must address some decisions and solve some problems, which we might not have
                        encountered if our aim had been limited to a printed edition alone. From the
                        project we have learned how theoretically difficult it may be, for instance,
                        to define exactly what makes a text an Ibsen-text, or when two
                        text-witnesses should be considered variants of the same text (work) versus
                        when they should be considered variants of different works. How different
                        can two texts be and still be considered to origin from the same work? At
                        the Wittgenstein Archives at the University of Bergen (WAB) it has been
                        decided not to link versions from "the same" work
                        (Ore &amp; Cripps, 98). Instead WAB leaves it to the individual scholar to
                        register similarity and equivalence between texts.
                    The aim to provide a genetic view of the texts excludes choosing the WAB
                        solution for the Ibsen project. On the other hand this kind of text linking
                        soon represents individual interpretation and claims about the texts. It is
                        important that electronic versions are made available for users outside the
                        project including tools allowing the users to store their own links and
                        networks around the texts.
                
                
                    When is a text a text?
                    For many years Allen Renear has researched the concept of text (Biggs &amp;
                        Huitfeldt, 1997) (Renear &amp; al., 1998). The Monist raised the question
                        "Does a text exist if we can not read it?" To this we may add: Does a
                        (written) text exist if it never has existed as a physical object?
                    For some of Ibsen's early plays the original manuscripts are lost. Copies by
                        copy-writers of some of these excist, copied for theatrical use, still
                        available in role books and prompt books. The role books are structured so
                        that the speech parts for one role are written in full, including parts of
                        surrounding text (from other roles and/or stage directions). (See &lt;&gt;)
                    In our particular case it is tempting to store the texts from the role books
                        with enough information to make it possible to create a virtual full text.
                        The text from the role books will have to be used in text critical comments
                        (and possibly the apparatus) so there are not any large labour costs
                        required to add the necessary linking information for "virtual full texts"
                        to be created. But is this something which should be done - or something we
                        should take care not to do? The role-books provide yet another difficult
                        practical and theoretical problem. If we do make a virtual complete text out
                        of the role books, we are not only transcribing an early witness; but we are
                        in fact creating it.
                    Making an electronic archive is one of the Ibsen-project's main goals. This
                        paper will discuss some of the problems we have encountered, and mainly the
                        difficulties in addressing the complexity of the text.
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Biggs
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Claus
                                    Huitfeldt
                                
                            
                            Philosophy and Electronic Publishing. Theory and
                                Metatheory in the Development of Text Encoding
                        
                        
                            The Monist
                            
                                80
                                3
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                        edited version of a network based discussion
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Karsten
                                    Kynde
                                
                            
                            Interconnecting Textual Layers
                        
                        
                            ALLC-ACH '98
                            
                                Debrecen
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Espen
                                    S.
                                    Ore
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Peter
                                    Cripps
                                
                            
                            The Electronic Publication of Wittgenstein's
                                Nachlass
                        
                        
                            The Digital Demotic, Selected Papers from DRH97
                            Office for Humanities Communication Publication Number
                                10
                            
                                
                                    Lou
                                    Burnard
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Marilyn
                                    Deegan
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Harold
                                    Short
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                King's College London
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Claus
                                    Huitfeldt
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Dino
                                    Buzzetti
                                
                            
                            Panel discussion at
                            Theory and Metatheory in the Development of Text
                                Encoding
                        
                        
                            at the conference
                            The Future of the Humanities in the Digital Age, Bergen
                                Sept. 1998
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        panel papers are to be published on the WWW.
                    
                
            
        
    
