


    
        
            
                Networked Moving Images
                
                    
                        Celia
                        Duffy
                        
                            Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama
                            c.duffy@rsamd.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Steve
                        Malloch
                    
                
                
                    
                        Tony
                        Pearson
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    Univeristy of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    This paper describes and demonstrates the work of the Performing Arts Data
                        Service (PADS) in piloting the networked delivery of moving image resources
                        for use in teaching film and TV studies and social history at the University
                        of Glasgow. Streaming high quality moving images poses many technical
                        questions, and we outline our solution which has proved robust within the
                        limited testing arena of the project. The main focus of the paper, however,
                        is on user issues, covering such areas as the choices we made for the design
                        of the user interface, what we have learned from our user trials and
                        evaluations, and what effects networked access to a library of moving image
                        material might have on pedagogic and research practices in the
                        humanities.
                
                
                    Overview of the project
                    A University of Glasgow consortium led by the PADS was chosen at the end of
                        1997 as one of two pilot sites for a new project to develop the delivery of
                        moving images to UK academic institutions via networks. The short-term aim
                        of the project, which was initiated by the British Universities Film &amp;
                        Video Council (BUFVC) in partnership with the British Film Institute and the
                        Joint Information Systems Information Committee (JISC) is to test both the
                        technical and pedagogical viability of networked delivery of moving pictures
                        to universities. Over the longer term, it may be the opening activity in a
                        radical new network service for UK higher education.
                    The collections of digitised moving images and related textual resources are
                        mounted on servers for access by lecturers and students via a secure web
                        gateway, with moving images streamed to individual workstations, computer
                        labs and lecture rooms in the university. Of particular interest to film and
                        TV studies academics are the collections of resources on Hitchcock's
                        Blackmail (including substantial extracts from both the sound and silent
                        versions of the film for comparison, a BBC documentary and a number of
                        related textual resources) and a collection of archive British TV of the
                        1950s and 60s.
                
                
                    Technical architecture
                    Once cleared for copyright via the BFI, the moving image material was
                        transferred onto Beta SP for digitisation by the Manchester Visualisation
                        Centre at the University of Manchester. From there it was forwarded to the
                        client sites. At Glasgow we have concentrated on MPEG1 format, but we are
                        also trailing MPEG2 format for some selected content after consultation with
                        academics on the desirability of high quality pictures. We have focussed on
                        campus-wide delivery, comparing two methods of storing and managing data:
                        from the PADS SGI servers (using MediaBase and HyperWave) via fast ethernet
                        and ATM and from the SUN servers of our partners in the Revelation project
                        at the Department of Computing Science.
                
                
                    Using the collections
                    HyperWave, the PADS information gateway system enables users to employ a
                        number of searching strategies (from simple searches on full text content or
                        specific metadata attributes to more specialised filters) and to have
                        results displayed in different ways, including graphical representations of
                        the structure of the information. Users simply click on hyperlinks in the
                        search results to play the movies via the MediaBase player. If browsing,
                        again, there are a number of choices; we have found that users value the
                        opportunity for browsing, an opportunity often denied in digital library
                        environments. In browsing mode, users are given a subset of the Dublin Core
                        metadata attributes to help them make their choice (including a brief
                        description, date and link to related resources). They can also choose to
                        access the full descriptive metadata for each item.
                
                
                    User evaluations
                    We have carried out evaluations of the use of this material in contrasting
                        academic situations. For example, the Hitchcock materials have been used as
                        part of a junior undergraduate lecture series, with materials made available
                        to students to follow up in their own time in a student lab; we have also
                        evaluated how senior undergraduate students majoring in film and TV studies
                        use the material for personal research, and we have gathered data from
                        academic colleagues in other universities on the utility of this method of
                        delivery and its implications for teaching and scholarship. There is a
                        striking attitudinal difference between faculty and students: students
                        regard this innovative method of delivery with some nonchalance (this is no
                        more then they have come to expect from their increasingly digitally-based
                        study environment), meanwhile faculty, having experienced the difficulties
                        of locating and using moving image materials in traditional formats for
                        teaching or research, are much more forthcoming about the potential
                        benefits. Priority areas for further development work are better indexing
                        and easy-to-use tools to manipulate content; on the wider scale, rights
                        management needs to be addressed urgently and a strategy formulated for
                        digitisation and access priorities.
                
                
                    Conclusions
                    In comparison with traditional methods of access to moving image materials,
                        networked delivery has clear advantages, including ease of access for larger
                        numbers of users than is traditionally possible, and facilitation of access
                        to a wide range of supporting materials alongside the moving images. Also
                        some disciplines which have hitherto underused the rich variety of moving
                        image resources available might be encouraged to take better advantage of
                        them. However, although the technical setup necessary to achieve networked
                        delivery of large amounts of moving image data is no longer at the "cutting
                        edge" it is still unavailable to those without a fairly sophisticated
                        technical architecture. This, coupled with other obstacles such as the
                        thorny issue of rights management, make the future widespread availability
                        of this kind of service still uncertain. At the end of the project we
                        believe we will have demonstrated significant pedagogic benefit and a
                        practical technical setup with which to achieve it, as a useful contribution
                        to the debate about future directions.
                
            
        
    
