


    
        
            
                Building a Place for Multimedia Studies in the
                    Humanities
                
                    
                        Andrew
                        Mactavish
                        Humanities Computing Centre McMaster
                                University
                            mactavis@mcmaster.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Joanne
                        Buckley
                    
                
                
                    
                        Geoffrey
                        M.
                        Rockwell
                        Department of Modern Languages McMaster
                                University
                            grockwel@mcmaster.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Does multimedia as a discipline of study fit within the academic model of a
                        traditional humanities faculty? Or do multimedia programmes belong in
                        computer science departments and technical colleges where technological
                        skill is usually highlighted over critical inquiry? Recently, these
                        questions were the topic of faculty-wide debate at McMaster University in
                        Hamilton, Ontario, where a small group of humanities-computing faculty
                        brought forward a proposal for a new B.A. Combined Honours in Multimedia.
                        The road to approval raised important issues about how the humanities
                        envisions multimedia and how it can accommodate the new forms of creative
                        endeavour made possible by the electronic combination of multiple media.
                    In this paper, we raise the question of how to build a place for multimedia
                        in the humanities. We will begin by giving a history of our degree proposal
                        and mapping out the process of approval, including the opposition we faced
                        and the responses we developed in our evaluation and promotion of multimedia
                        as an appropriate and justifiable course of study in the humanities. We will
                        use our practical experience as a base upon which to theorize on matters of
                        legitimacy, technical skill vs. critical skill, and the more general problem
                        of placing multimedia in the humanities.
                    The major parts of this paper are:
                            1. A short history of humanities computing at McMaster
                                University.
                            2. The rationale for a B.A. in Multimedia and an outline of the
                                program proposal, including a handout with course outlines.
                            3. An analysis of the approval process, including the nature of
                                the opposition we faced and our strategies for positive engagement
                                with these challenges.
                            4. A discussion of the theoretical issues arising from making a
                                place for multimedia in the Humanities.
                        
                
                
                    A Short History of Humanities Computing at McMaster University
                    Humanities computing at McMaster officially began with the founding of the
                        Humanities Computing Centre (HCC) in 1986 and with the establishment of an
                        Assistant to the Dean (Computing). In 1994, Geoffrey Rockwell became the new
                        Assistant to the Dean (Computing), a position he holds to this day.
                        McMaster's first humanities computing course (Introduction to Computing in
                        the Humanities) was taught in 1995. The Humanities Communications Centre--an
                        extension of the HCC--was opened in December of 1996. A group of new courses
                        in the area of multimedia design was introduced in 1998 and a new faculty
                        appointment was made at that time to teach them. To support the new BA
                        programme, we have added 14 new courses in multimedia and we are hiring new
                        faculty and technical staff.
                
                
                    Programme Rationale
                    As multimedia spreads as a viable and popular form of communication and
                        entertainment, it becomes all the more important that universities study it
                        and empower students with the knowledge of it. As J. Hillis Miller points
                        out, students and scholars of "this new generation have been to a
                        considerable degree formed by a new visual and aural 'culture'," which
                        increasingly includes multimedia-based artefacts.Miller, J.
                            Hillis. "Literary and Cultural Studies in the transnational University."
                                Culture and the Problem of the Disciplines.
                            Ed. John Carlos Rowe. New York: Columbia UP, 60. Since the
                        humanities traditionally studies communication and representation, whether
                        in the form of fiction, language, philosophy, history, music, or the visual
                        arts, it makes sense to include multimedia in humanities' course
                        offerings.
                    If multimedia is to be a legitimate area of study in the humanities, however,
                        we must envision it as a field of inquiry that includes both the production
                        and critical analysis of multimedia artefacts. It follows that teaching
                        multimedia in the humanities means teaching students more than how to use
                        the tools. We also need to teach them how to be critical of multimedia, both
                        in its particular instances and in its larger social context. In other
                        words, to address what Willard McCarty calls the "urgent need for a critical
                        understanding of the new medium," we need to combine the technical, the
                        creative, and the analytical.McCarty, Willard. &lt;&gt;
                        Students whose strengths span these skills will graduate with a balanced
                        knowledge and appreciation of multimedia and, therefore, will stand the best
                        chance of success in their post-degree endeavors.
                
                
                    Programme Outline: Interdisciplinarity
                    At this point, we will outline the program design, including the core set of
                        multimedia courses. Copies of the course descriptions will be available for
                        attendees. We designed the programme's courses to fit and enhance
                        traditional humanities programmes offered at McMaster. We build upon the
                        textual disciplines by offering courses on hypertext and electronic texts;
                        we build upon the visual arts by offering courses in graphics and digital
                        video; we build upon drama by offering courses in animation and the design
                        of space; and we build upon music by offering courses in audio and
                        electronic music.
                    Our decision to adopt a Combined Honours format, where students must complete
                        an Honours degree in Multimedia and another subject in the humanities or
                        social sciences, reflects what we believe to be the interdisciplinary nature
                        of multimedia. Since multimedia involves combining artefacts in various
                        media--artefacts that are the basis of study in disciplines across the
                        humanities--it makes sense to promote an interdisciplinary approach. So, we
                        ask students to combine their study of multimedia with another subject area.
                        One benefit of this approach is that we will not compete with other
                        departments in our faculty. On the contrary, we hope to attract new students
                        to McMaster who would otherwise attend post-secondary institutions
                        elsewhere.
                
                
                    The Approval Process: Budgets and Balances
                    Bringing the proposal through the approval process not only meant securing
                        financial support, but it also meant negotiating a route through faculty
                        assumptions about the technical and the analytical. Finding money is one
                        thing, but challenging notions of humanities scholarship can be just as
                        demanding.
                    
                        a) BudgetingHere we will describe our experience seeking
                            government and industry support and the importance of preparing a
                            detailed and thorough budget. This section will end with a short
                            discussion of long-term budgeting and the presentation of a budget
                            checklist.
                        b) Internal SupportWhile industry and government were attracted
                            by the potential employability of our programme's graduates, members of
                            our own faculty distrusted what they perceived to be an over-emphasis on
                            technology and employability. Even after reviewing updated versions of
                            the proposal that stressed the programme's commitment to the traditional
                            elements of humanities scholarship, some colleagues still wondered why
                            an arts faculty should support what they assumed belongs in a technical
                            college. It is as if there was an instinctive distrust of technology and
                            employability.
                    
                
                
                    Legitimizing Multimedia in the Humanities
                    While we are optimistic that our programme has a stable future, the process
                        of programme approval raised more questions than it answered about
                        legitimacy in the humanities, and, by extension, about competing visions of
                        the humanities. The final section of our presentation will focus on some of
                        these questions.
                    It comes as no real surprise to find that government and industry seem
                        willing to envision a humanities that embraces technology and employability.
                        After all, the humanities is facing increasing pressures to be more socially
                        relevant and accountable.For a sampling of recent scholarship on
                            the humanities and social responsibility, see Kaplan, E. Ann and George
                            Levine, eds. The Politics of Research. New
                            Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 1997, and Readings, Bill. The
                                University in Ruins. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard UP,
                            1996. But how should we respond if these visions of a
                        technologized humanities rest upon a uncritical belief in fuelling the
                        economy by training producers and consumers of technological goods and
                        services? While humanities-based multimedia programmes might indeed increase
                        producers and consumers of technology, we need to make sure that our
                        programmes in humanities computing retain critical and analytical dimensions
                        that challenge economic forces primarily interested in the accumulation of
                        capital regardless of the cost to social equity. At the same time, we need
                        to recognize that multimedia students may find themselves in the fortunate
                        position of being highly desirable on the job market. For this reason, when
                        we build relationships with industry, we must be sure to maintain control
                        over curriculum.
                    It is also unsurprising to find in the humanities a general distrust of
                        technology's apparent complicity with technical skill and employability. Yet
                        we might wonder about what kinds of difference the humanities sees between
                        the technical skills used to create digital works and the technical skills
                        used to create critical works of scholarship, not to mention works of art.
                        If the differences can be found in a hierarchy of cultural value that
                        privileges the intellectual over the physical, then how do we reconcile this
                        with the physical techniques learned in drama, painting, sculpture, print
                        making, etc.? The humanities recognizes that physical technique in the fine
                        arts has an important intellectual component; however, once computer
                        technology enters the scene, it is as if mechanization and automation remove
                        human intellect. But as Malcolm McCullough reminds us, "technology has both
                        intellectual and physical elements."McCullough, Malcolm. Abstracting Craft: The Practiced Digital Hand.
                            Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1996, 67.
                    Building a legitimate place for multimedia in the humanities at McMaster
                        University has meant developing and promoting a concept of multimedia that
                        connects the physical and the intellectual and that emphasizes multimedia as
                        a legitimate mode of representation deserving and requiring humanities
                        scholarship. Indeed, if the humanities is to help give an equitable and
                        ethical shape to the digital age, then it needs to engage with new
                        communications technologies at the level of criticism and of practice.
                
            
        
    
