


    
        
            
                The Analysis of Classical Greek and Latin Compositional
                    Word-Order Data
                
                    
                        Fiona
                        J.
                        Tweedie
                        Department: Statistics University of
                                Glasgow
                            fiona@stats.gla.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Bernard
                        D.
                        Frischer
                        Dept. of Classics University of
                                California
                            frischer49@aol.com
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    A recent paper by Frischer et al. (1999) examines the position of the direct
                        object and its governing verb in works in Classical Greek and Latin. Through
                        statistical analysis of a great number of sentences, one long suspected
                        difference between Latin and Greek word-order was confirmed, and the
                        ramifications of this observation were explored for some possible cases of
                        word-order transference between Latin and Greek. The difference between the
                        languages concerns the positioning of the accusative direct object with
                        respect to the verb governing it. That there is a difference in the Greek
                        and Latin distributions is no surprise: Classical linguists have long
                        observed that Latin has a greater tendency to place the verb at the end of
                        the clause than does Greek. From this fact alone one might predict that the
                        direct object in Latin is more likely to precede than to follow the verb on
                        which it depends than is the case in Greek. This prediction was tested
                        empirically by tabulating the direct object distributions in sixty passages
                        written by fifteen Latin and ten Greek prose authors. Each passage was
                        randomly selected in the text of an author. Analysis was based on the first
                        one hundred direct objects in the accusative case that were encountered in a
                        passage, and a tabulation was done of those that occurred before and those
                        after the governing verbs. With remarkable consistency, the texts in our
                        sample clumped into a Latin and a Greek cluster, offering strong empirical
                        and statistically significant proof that the position of the direct object
                        with respect to its governing verb differed in Greek and Latin prose.
                    Five Greek texts by two authors writing in Greek turned out to be anomalous,
                        fitting firmly into the Latin group. Four of the texts were written by
                        Cassius Dio; the fifth is the Greek translation of the Emperor Augustus'
                            Res Gestae, a bilingual version of which
                        survives, and whose original is known to have been written in Latin.
                    In considering the results, including the anomalous texts, the study showed
                        that native language did not necessarily have an effect on a writer's
                        placement of the direct object; nor did the language of an important
                        literary or historical source. Native Greek authors writing in Latin
                        respected Latin word order; Romans writing in Greek generally conformed to
                        Greek practice.
                    The study suggested that some but not all explanations for the data are
                        linguistic. On the linguistic level, it was the greater consistency of Latin
                        SOV word-order that helped the Latin pattern to prevail over the more
                        flexible Greek positioning of the verb and direct object. This was true not
                        only for Roman authors writing Latin with a Greek source before them (like
                        Aulus Gellius or Cicero) but also for a Greek author like Ammianus
                        Marcellinus writing in Latin. It was evidently normally easy for both Greeks
                        and Romans to recognize and to respect the tendency of Latin to place the
                        verb at the end of the clause. On the other hand, in the interesting case of
                        the Greek translation of the Res Gestae and other
                        official documents, where the Roman chancellery's habit of translating Latin
                        into Greek through quasi-relexification was seen, the study proposed an
                        explanation based either on Roman scrupulosity in legal matters or on a
                        sociological factor of linguistic hegemony. Finally, in the case of Cassius
                        Dio there was seen the operation of a psycholinguistic or sociolinguistic
                        cause for word-order transference: Dio's conscious or unconscious
                        presentation of himself as a Roman.
                    The data sets used by Frischer et al. list for each text sample the number of
                        direct objects that occur before the governing verb
                        in main clauses (MCB) and other clauses (OB) as well as the number of direct
                        objects that occur after the governing verb in main
                        clauses (MCA) and other clauses (OA). In most cases the total number of
                        direct objects is 100. There are a few samples where only 99 sentences were
                        examined, the data have been rescaled to have a total of 100. Frischer et
                        al. (1999) treat the number of clauses in each of the categories as
                        separate, independent random variables. Quantitative linguists and
                        stylometricians may not be aware of a well-known problem that affects the
                        "standard" statistical analysis of compositional data, that is, when dealing
                        with data that adds up to a known total. This presentation aims to explain
                        the problem, present one approach that succeeds in solving it; and apply
                        this approach to such statistical techniques such as principal components
                        analysis, cluster analysis and discriminant analysis. The conclusions of
                        Frischer et al. (1999) will be re-examined.
                
                
                    Compositional Data Analysis
                    The statistical analysis detailed in the previous section produces easily
                        interpretable results; separate clusters of Latin and Greek authors.
                        However, the authors ignore a constraint on the data, that the number of
                        clauses examined is always one hundred. This constraint has far-reaching
                        implications, Aitchison (1986) shows that that interpretation of the
                        covariance matrix of data with a constrained sum is fraught with problems.
                        Thus any analysis of the data which involves the covariance matrix is also
                        suspect. This includes principal components analysis, discriminant analysis
                        and certain versions of cluster analysis. We shall use compositional data
                        analysis analogues of these techniques to investigate these data.
                    Logcontrast principal components analysis and logcontrast cluster analysis
                        broadly confirm the results from the crude analysis and add refinements; the
                        Graecian nature of Varro's word-ordering and the highlighting of genre
                        differences with Tacitus appear to merit further investigation. In addition,
                        some Greek texts of Plutarch and Marcus Aurelius appear more Latinate than
                        had been previously noticed.
                    Discriminant analysis results in these Greek texts being classed as Latinate,
                        while Tacitus' Agricola is classified as Graecian.
                        In addition, the texts by Cassius Dio and the Greek version of the Res Gestae are classed as Latinate.
                    Further work is currently being undertaken on other works by Varro which
                        appears to indicate that his word-order straddles the Greek-Latin boundary.
                        This will be reported in detail at the conference.
                
            
        
        
            
                References:
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Aitchison
                                
                            
                            The Statistical Analysis of Compositional Data
                            Monographs in Statistics and Applied
                                Probability
                            
                                London
                                Chapman and Hall
                                1986
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    B.
                                    D.
                                    Frischer
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Andersen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Burnstein
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Crawford
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Dik
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Gallucci
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Gowing
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Guthrie
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Haslam
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    I.
                                    Holmes
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    V.
                                    Rudich
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    K.
                                    Sherk
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Taylor
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    F.
                                    J.
                                    Tweedie
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    B.
                                    Vine
                                
                            
                            Word-order transference between Latin and Greek: The
                                relative position of the accusative direct object and the governing
                                verb in Cassius Dio and other Greek and Roman prose authors
                        
                        
                            Harvard Studies in Classical Philology
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                        Forthcoming
                    
                
            
        
    
