


    
        
            
                Open Panel on Non-traditional Authorship Attribution
                    Studies
                
                    
                        Joseph
                        Rudman
                        Department of English Carnegie Mellon
                                University
                            Rudman@cmphys.phys.cmu.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                During the last three or four ACH-ALLC conferences, many of the people working in
                    the areas of non-traditional authorship attribution, stylistics, and other
                    related fields met over coffee, discussed various problems, and expressed the
                    need for a more formal gathering. This group included the following (and I
                    apologize if I missed anyone -- no notes were taken): Harald Baayen, Richard Forsyth, Bernie Frischer, Lyman W.
                            Gurney, Penelope J. Gurney, David Holmes, Thomas B. Horton, Joseph
                            Rudman, and Fiona Tweedy.
                
                I have been asked by many of these practitioners to arrange a panel at this
                    meeting. It is an open panel -- anyone may request an item be placed on the
                    agenda and lead the discussion for that item. The final "members" of the panel
                    will include many practitioners not on the above list.
                There will be no papers presented during this session. It will be a moderated,
                    modified open discussion on the state of non-traditional authorship studies, the
                    direction these studies should be going, and how to get there.
                Practitioners were and invited to submit short (~5 minutes) summaries of leading
                    edge work in progress for possible inclusion in the session. No more than four
                    of these will be scheduled for presentation in the session. Everyone was invited
                    to post "work in progress" summaries by May 30, so that these would be digested
                    before the session convenes.
                Talking points were made available before the meeting to all interested members
                    of the ACH-ALLC. We did not want to dictate which talking points should be
                    discussed. We have solicited suggestions for talking points, questions, and/or
                    comments from all interested parties and only then was an agenda set.
                Since the final agenda was not be set until shortly before the meeting, we can
                    only give a conceptual overview in this abstract.
                The following were "seed" talking points and were made available to all
                    interested parties:
                        1. Are any published non-traditional authorship attribution studies
                            valid?
                        2. What elements must a non-traditional authorship attribution study
                            have to be valid?
                        3. How can we answer Furbank and Owens' statement, "...stylometry
                            cannot be classed as a `science,' and must presumably be thought of only
                            as an aspiration."?
                        4. Why can practitioners not agree on which statistical tests should
                            be used?
                        5. Is quantifiable style a closed system?
                        6. How do we account for the changing concept of "author?"
                        7. What is wrong with non-traditional authorship studies?
                        8. What is right with non-traditional studies?
                        9. What, if anything, should be done by this group to bring some kind
                            of order to the field?
                    
                One topic that was suggested by Professor Gerald R.
                        McMenamin and put on the agenda after the conference proposal was
                    accepted and before the deadline for this abstract is: 
                        The Value of Forensic Linguistics to Non-Traditional Authorship
                            Studies
                    
                This entire panel session will be recorded, transcribed, and disseminated. An
                    edited and expanded version of the transcription is planned.
                 We will discuss if this should become an annual session (subject each year to
                    the approval of the appropriate committee) during the ACH-ALLC conference.
                We do invite any interested conference attendee to join in this open panel
                    discussion.
            
        
    
