


    
        
            
                Identifying, preserving, and using high quality digital
                    resources
                
                    
                        Michael
                        Fraser
                        Humanities Computing Unit, Computing Services Oxford University
                            michael.fraser@oucs.ox.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Michael
                        Popham
                        Humanities Computing Unit, Computing Services Oxford University
                            michael.popham@oucs.ox.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Elizabeth
                        Solopova
                        Department of English University of
                                Kentucky
                            esolop@pop.uky.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                        Selecting Resources for a Subject Gateway: Who Decides?
                        Michael Fraser
                        
                            The Higher Education Funding bodies in the UK recently called for
                                bids to develop subject-based faculty 'hubs' or gateways which
                                locate, catalogue, and give access to digital resources suitable for
                                use in Higher Education teaching and research as part of the new
                                Resource Discovery Network. The new faculty hubs will further
                                develop the design and purpose of the existing centrally-funded
                                gateways, amongst which ADAM (Art, Design and Media), IHR-INFO
                                (History), and SOSIG (Social Sciences) currently have some remit for
                                humanities disciplines.
                            The Humanities Computing Unit has been invited to submit a bid to
                                develop the proposed Humanities Hub of the new Resource Discovery
                                Network. The proposal draws upon existing work relating to subject
                                gateways within Oxford, in particular the HumBul Gateway for the
                                Humanities and, on a smaller scale, the Computer-Assisted Theology
                                gateway, as well as other gateways within the UK and beyond.
                            This paper will focus on a particular issue which lies at the core of
                                any subject-based gateway, the criteria by which resources are
                                selected for inclusion within the gateway. Subject gateways
                                explicitly state or at the very least imply a concern that the
                                resources catalogued are quality-assured, an assurance based on
                                human intervention. But what does quality mean in this context?
                                Against what criteria and with what authority can an individual
                                resource be deemed fit for inclusion and therefore deemed fit for
                                purpose?
                            Gateways tend to fall into two basic types. To a large extent the
                                HumBul Gateway and the Computer-Assisted Theology gateway
                                demonstrate both types. The Theology gateway was developed by an
                                individual enthusiast with a keen interest in the possibilities
                                offered by the Internet for teaching and research and with specific
                                subject expertise. Gateways of this type are numerous on the
                                Internet and indeed many of the existing gateways to humanities
                                subjects fall into this category. For the purposes of this
                                discussion such gateways may be termed amateur gateways since their
                                development is often dependant on one or two individuals, often
                                without formal institutional support and frequently presented with
                                little information about selection criteria, intended audience,
                                available metadata, consistent classification, advanced searching
                                and so on. What these gateways can offer however, is a subject
                                practitioner's view of the Internet with evaluative as well as
                                descriptive annotation for each linked resource; they derive their
                                authority from the recognised expertise of the subject specialist.
                                The second type of gateway, one which to a large extent the new
                                HumBul strives to be, and which may be termed the professional
                                gateway, are fewer in number (certainly for the humanities). The
                                professional gateway is identified by institutional and sometimes
                                national support, developed by a specific project team, and
                                constructed along the lines of an advanced library catalogue (often
                                drawing its cataloguers from amongst subject librarians). The
                                professional gateway offers durability, structured and easily
                                retrievable data. On the other hand there is a tendency to hide from
                                the end-user the evaluative judgments made about individual
                                resources held within the virtual collection despite publication of
                                the criteria by which resources are selected for inclusion. Both
                                types of gateway contend with the inherent tension between trying to
                                be a digital library (cataloguing and dissemination) and something
                                like an academic reviews journal (discovery and evaluation).
                            The EU-funded DESIRE Project, "Selection Criteria for Quality
                                Controlled Information Gateways", developed and published a list of
                                quality selection criteria designed as a reference point for
                                subject-gateways (see &lt;&gt;). The criteria presented were arranged under five headings
                                which may be summarized as relating to: audience, content, design,
                                maintenance or durability, and comparison with related resources.
                                Under each heading a number of sub-categories contain a series of
                                questions to be considered by resource contributors to subject
                                gateways. The categories are comprehensive and the questions
                                detailed. The application of this criteria is intended to highlight
                                quality and limit quantity. The ADAM and SOSIG Gateways, for
                                example, either explicitly draw attention to this particular set of
                                criteria or have developed a similar set for their own resource
                                contributors.
                            Leaving aside the issue of whether such a comprehensive approach to
                                selection criteria actually serves the purpose for which it was
                                designed, it is significant to note that the wide range of questions
                                which are required to be answered satisfactorily before a resource
                                can be admitted into the catalogue bear little or no relation to the
                                metadata available to the end-user. For the most part the user of
                                gateways such as the two mentioned above are presented with fairly
                                sparse metadata consisting of title, subject, description and so on.
                                Whilst the cataloguer is forced to make evaluative judgements about
                                resources, the user has little notion of what these judgements might
                                have been. The mere fact that a resource has been included within
                                the gateway is, it seems, assumed to be enough. Descriptions are
                                short and objective, and rarely is an indication given even to the
                                contributor's identity or authority for making such judgments.
                            A fundamental question which underlies this paper is whether there is
                                a need for detailed quality assurance at all when the effort might
                                be better expended on more comprehensive, factual, metadata to
                                assist the searching and delivery of a gateway's holdings. The
                                combination of professional cataloging and amateur evaluation
                                appears to be successfully provided by services like the Internet
                                Movie Database and to some extent by commercial ventures like
                                Amazon.Com. Both these databases, however, concern themselves with
                                offline media available to their users only with some additional
                                effort. The Internet subject gateway, of course, catalogues
                                resources sharing the same digital medium as itself. It is intrinsic
                                to an Internet gateway to not only point away from itself but to
                                actually take the user to those resources using the same mode of
                                delivery. One might argue that providing reviews of Internet
                                resources is a superfluous activity given that the function of a
                                gateway is to take the user to the objects which they might inspect
                                for themselves, a task which neither the Internet Movie Database nor
                                Amazon.Com can undertake.
                            On the other hand, as this paper will argue, given that academic
                                subject gateways have an additional role of providing access to
                                digital resources suitable for teaching and research the Internet
                                offers something which the offline media cannot: a full integration
                                of the resource catalogue, resource evaluation, and the resources
                                themselves. It is only the combination of all four fundamental
                                elements, discovery, evaluation, cataloguing and dissemination,
                                which moves us towards a gateway which is subject-based, academic,
                                and Internet integrated, a combination which lies at the core of the
                                proposed Humanities Hub.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Accept/Reject? Quality decisions facing the Oxford Text Archive
                        Michael Popham
                        
                            The Oxford Text Archive is one of the world's best known electronic
                                text centres, and has been in existence for almost a quarter of a
                                century. At the time of its establishment in 1976, there were
                                relatively few humanities scholars interested in the creation and
                                use of electronic textual resources, which meant that it was all the
                                more important to ensure that their efforts were preserved and made
                                available to future generations. However, despite the small size of
                                the humanities computing community, the resource implications of
                                undertaking any work involving electronic text meant that such
                                endeavours were rarely entered into lightly, or without significant
                                scholarly and technical input.
                            In the summer of 1996, the OTA was appointed as the electronic text
                                Service Provider for the UK's national Arts and Humanities Data
                                Service. In many respects this appointment was extremely timely, as
                                by now the international community of humanities computing scholars
                                had grown significantly, and many individuals who were less
                                computer-literate than their predecessors were starting to take
                                advantage of the facilities offered by cheap scanning technologies
                                and the emergence of the world wide web as a ubiquitous technology.
                                Individual academics saw less of a need to rely upon the archival
                                and distribution services offered by bodies such as the OTA, as they
                                now believed that they could undertake these tasks for themselves.
                                Yet this rapid growth in self-publishing on the web has raised a
                                number of concerns -- not simply about the quality of the materials
                                being created, but also about the methods and standards that have
                                been used.
                            Within the UK, the Arts and Humanities Research Board (AHRB) has
                                recently been established following agreement by the British
                                Academy, the Department of Education for Northern Ireland (DENI),
                                and the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE). They
                                have agreed to set up the Board pending a decision by the Government
                                on whether to establish an Arts and Humanities Research Council.
                                Funding for the AHRB will total over £36 million in the financial
                                year 1998-99, and £44 million in 1999-2000, with contributions from
                                all three parties to the agreement. Under section 10 of the
                                application form for research grants in excess of £5000, applicants
                                are now told that in the case of "projects whose primary purpose, or
                                significant product, is the creation of an electronic resource, it
                                will be a condition of award that data created as a result of the
                                research, together with documentation, should be offered for deposit
                                at the Arts and Humanities Data Service, within a reasonable time
                                after the completion of the project. Applicants involved [in]
                                research leading to the creation of such a resource are strongly
                                advised to obtain advice from the AHDS concerning appropriate
                                standards and methods". In practice this means that the AHDS Service
                                Providers, such as the OTA, have been receiving a glut of enquiries
                                from academics who will be affected by this new condition of award.
                                Many of those who have contacted the OTA have been somewhat
                                surprised to learn that we are less than enthusiastic about
                                endorsing their plans to create their materials solely in HTML, and
                                distribute these via a local website -- and very few have shown any
                                awareness of the relevant standards for resource creation,
                                preservation, and metadata.
                            We now find ourselves in something of a dilemma. The OTA is obviously
                                keen to ensure the long-term preservation and availability of the
                                scholarly outputs of AHRB-funded research. Yet at the same time,
                                many of the electronic resources that seem likely to be produced by
                                AHRB funding are not going to be created in accordance with crucial
                                standards and best practices. So, whilst the scholarly content of
                                these resources will almost certainly be of the highest order, they
                                may turn out to be poor quality resources from the point of view of
                                long-term preservation and viability. In order to address this
                                problem, the OTA (and the four other AHDS Service Providers) will be
                                producing a series of Guides to Good Practice, which will provide
                                the necessary guidance to the creators of electronic scholarly
                                resources. However, at the time of writing, it seems unlikely that
                                the AHRB will compel resource creators to follow the advice of the
                                AHDS Service Providers, which will surely result in the creation of
                                many technologically weak and poor quality resources, not to mention
                                the squandering of available funding. Moreover, if these resources
                                are to be preserved and remain viable in the long-term, they are
                                likely to prove difficult and costly for the OTA to maintain, and
                                present future end-users with additional problems (and therefore
                                costs) to overcome.
                            Elsewhere within the academic community, we have seen the emergence
                                of other recommendations, such as the MLA's Guidelines for
                                Electronic Scholarly Editions. Although this document relates to the
                                production of one very specific kind of electronic textual resource,
                                it is gratifying to note that it draws heavily upon the
                                recommendations set out in the Text Encoding Initiative's Guidelines
                                for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange (TEI-P3), and is
                                therefore in keeping with the recommendations made by the OTA to
                                resource creators. Even so, despite the fact that the MLA, TEI, and
                                OTA are in accord with regard to what constitutes good practice when
                                creating electronic resources, it seems likely that it will be some
                                time yet before the majority of academics (and especially those with
                                minimal computing expertise), adopt such practices as a matter of
                                course.
                            This paper will briefly set out the OTA's perception of electronic
                                resource creation within the UK, and examine the reasons why many
                                academics seem unwilling or unable to adopt the recommendations and
                                good practices that originate from several of the key players in the
                                scholarly electronic text community. It will then look particularly
                                at the challenges confronting the OTA when identifying and accepting
                                electronic textual resources for accessioning into the OTA's
                                holdings. Having discussed the difficulties of weighing scholarly
                                merit against the long-term preservation costs, viability, and
                                usability of resources, the paper will conclude with an explication
                                of the OTA's policy concerning this contentious area, and set out
                                our criteria for resource selection.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Fit for Purpose: Issues Surrounding the Use of Digital Resources in
                            Research and Teaching
                        Elizabeth Solopova
                        
                            Humanities disciplines have a large and varied body of digital
                                resources on which to draw for teaching and research purposes which
                                include scholarly editions, on-line dictionaries and journals,
                                collections of digital texts and images, large Internet gateways and
                                numerous individual and course Web pages. In spite of the recent
                                quick growth of digital resources, there are no guidelines
                                published, as far as I am aware, which assist the academic in
                                assessing the quality of a digital resource for actual use in
                                teaching or research. This is not surprising. First, the answer to
                                whether a resource is fit for a purpose will almost always be, 'it
                                depends'. Not only does the answer depend on the general purpose
                                envisaged, whether for teaching or research, it will also inevitably
                                depend on the precise needs of the individual asking the question,
                                for there is a whole spectrum of approaches to the subject even
                                within a single discipline. Secondly, it is not surprising that no
                                set of criteria exists for determining the quality of a digital
                                resource when so little published criteria exist for assessing the
                                quality of academic research in general. It is a contentious issue,
                                as the United Kingdom academic community who have been subject to
                                the Research Assessment Exercise will confirm. But the issue also
                                comes to the fore within the evaluation process for tenure, the
                                acceptance of publications by publishers and editorial boards, and
                                the success or otherwise of research funding. Underpinning all of
                                these is some notion of peer-review and the refereeing process which
                                remains crucial in the assessment of research publications.
                            How appropriate is the application of the peer-review methods to the
                                assessment of digital resources? In summary one might argue that
                                digital resources should not be treated any differently from other
                                resources. The peer-review process is as appropriate for determining
                                their 'usefulness', as it is for effecting their development,
                                publication and, hopefully, the academic rewards structure. The
                                assessment of digital resources, however, whilst always requiring
                                expert knowledge of the subject area, also requires an understanding
                                of the underlying technology. Acknowledged experts in manuscript
                                studies, for example, simply may not appreciate the potential
                                scholarly contribution of an electronic facsimile, if the digital
                                medium itself is significantly more alien to them, than the
                                publication of another printed facsimile. The recognition that
                                subject experts must understand the potential of the technology
                                employed, in order to assess the quality of a resource, was apparent
                                in the recent study undertaken by the Arts &amp; Humanities Data
                                Service into the requirements of academics for the scholarly use of
                                digital resources (see ). The Oxford
                                Text Archive reported not only that their academic users perceived
                                as obstacles to the use of digital resources the technical ability
                                required to use certain resources and the corresponding lack of
                                training available, but also the current proliferation of resources
                                which by-pass the benefits of academic review.
                            Academic practitioners who do have a familiarity with current and
                                emerging technologies, however, have come to expect more from a
                                digital resource than can be delivered on paper. The electronic
                                edition of a medieval text is no longer a novelty. For both research
                                and teaching purposes there is almost an accepted expectation that a
                                critical edition in digital form will comprise not only the full
                                texts, but also the high quality digital facsimiles of all the
                                surviving witnesses. Moreover the witnesses are expected to be
                                encoded for advanced searching and linked to supplementary materials
                                such as glossaries and textual notes. In such cases it is less a
                                single resource than an entire scholarly environment that projects
                                are expected to provide. The editions are expected to be easy to use
                                and transparent even for a student inexperienced in both their
                                academic and technical aspects. As is well known digital resources
                                which strive to meet such expectations are often expensive, very
                                time consuming undertakings, requiring unremitting devotion and
                                extremely hard work from the teams which create them. These
                                difficulties are acknowledged by some members of the academic
                                community in that they make a positive evaluation of digital
                                resources as suitable for academic use, in spite of, for example,
                                the lack of high quality digital photography (accepting that it is
                                expensive and that permissions are difficult to obtain), or
                                (accepting the need to work in the situation of ever changing and
                                developing technology) in spite of occasional technological
                                failures, the lack of compatibility with all the existing platforms,
                                or their slowness even on the most current computers. Other members
                                of academic community are however less forgiving of these conditions
                                'outside the editor's control', and lose confidence in digital
                                resources.
                            Another difficulty well-known to any 'insider' is that the huge
                                quantities of data which underlie electronic resources often exist
                                in a form which makes them especially difficult to proofread. In
                                these situations the proofreading and checking done by the project
                                team under the increasing pressure of deadlines never seems
                                sufficient and may have to stop before complete satisfaction is
                                achieved. Again the arguments for making the results of work
                                available in spite of certain imperfections, and the dangers which
                                may result from this are not easy to balance. One particular danger
                                is that as a result of a combination of a large body of complex data
                                in a digital resource with a lack of technical expertise on the
                                users' part, a resource might be used or recommended for scholarly
                                use for some time before its faults become apparent. Any 'forgiving'
                                attitude on the part of the academic community, which itself may
                                benefit from the early publication of a cutting-edge resource still
                                imperfect in some aspects, should require an honest assessment of
                                the resource by its creators and an open statement of its
                                weaknesses. The promise of easy updating which comes with digital
                                technology justly encourages a 'forgiving' attitude, but should not
                                be used as a justification for the publication of poor quality work. 
                            The input of scholars with different backgrounds is required for the
                                evaluation of digital resources within collections and gateways.
                                Ultimately, the inclusion of a resource within a peer-reviewed
                                gateway or a 'published' digital collection should have the same
                                effect upon its use and the reward of its creators as is associated
                                with current publishing activities.
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
