


    
        
            
                English Poetry 1579-1830: The Spenserian Tradition in
                    Hypertext
                
                    
                        David
                        Hill
                        Radcliffe
                        Department of English Virginia Tech 
                            drad@vt.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                English Poetry 1579-1830: The Spenserian Tradition is an
                    interactive database consisting of over 3000 poems and essays supplemented by
                    6000 author biographies, anecdotes, and critical remarks drawn from pre-1900
                    publications. Readers can find information on over 800 writers who imitated or
                    criticized Spenser in the era when literature in English was constituted as
                    "English Literature." The project includes imitations of Spenser's poems,
                    imitations of those imitations, poems written in Spenserian stanzas and
                    variants, and poems that mention Spenser. Since most ambitious poets and critics
                    are on record about Spenser, the database contains biographies and critical
                    remarks about the majority of writers in the present literary canon. But it also
                    includes much ephemeral and topical material--periodical verse, school
                    exercises, patronage poems--so that researchers can examine the literary system
                    more broadly conceived, including hundreds of figures omitted in conventional
                    anthologies, literary histories, and reference books.
                Users can select records by keywords, genre, topic, bibliographic, or demographic
                    criteria, and by personal associations. Once records are marked, users can
                    compile bibliographies, display quantitative data on time lines, and tabulate
                    demographic information according to a variety of specifications. One can look
                    at what a given writer has to say about other writers in the database, and what
                    other writers have to say about a given poet or critic. The project is scripted
                    so that textual and biographical links can be made "on the fly," allowing users
                    considerable flexibility in translating historical into hypertextual links.
            
        
    
