


    
        
            
                The Ibsen Letters - and Beyond
                
                    
                        Øyvind
                        Eide
                        
                            Centre for Ibsen Studies
                            University of Oslo
                            oyvind.eide@ub.uio.no
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                This paper will explore the possibilities for combining TEI encoding and database
                    approaches in order to present a structure of metadata about letters, and
                    demonstrate how these metadata can be used to integrate information from
                    different sources in order to generate TEI documents "on the fly". We will also
                    show how this system can be extended to include not only letters wrritten by a
                    single person, bu also letter exchanges between different persons.
                In January 1998, the Manuscript project at the Centre for Ibsen Studies at the
                    University of Oslo was started. The goals of the project are as follows:
                        Locate all original manuscripts and letters written by Ibsen
                        Track down material that is still unknown to the research
                            community
                        Make digital facsimiles of all manuscripts and letters
                    
                The Manuscript project works in close co-operation with two other projects which
                    are also located at the centre, i.e. The International Ibsen Bibliography1. &lt;&gt;
                     and the Henrik Ibsen's Writing.2. &lt;&gt; The
                    digitization part of the Manuscript project does not aim at digitizing a
                    particular collection of documents from one archive, but the writings of Henrik
                    Ibsen wherever they are located. The manuscripts for his plays, poems, articles
                    and speeches constitute a relatively small number of items located in 10-15
                    collections, whereas ownership of approximately 2.700 known letters, telegrams
                    and dedications3. This number includes letters that we know the
                        existence, but not the whereabouts, of. We believe most of them to be
                        lost.is spread between 100-150 different libraries, archives, museums
                    and private collectors.
                We have developed a digital register of all known letters based on a printed
                    register from 1978.4. Henrik Ibsen's brev : kronologisk registrant
                        med adressatregister m.v. / ved Øyvind Anker. - Oslo, 1978. The
                    purpose of the digital register is to:
                        Contain information about each of Ibsen's letters, including
                            information about the location of the originals
                        Contain information about the status of the digitization of each
                            letter, with links to the digital facsimiles
                        Support advanced searches
                    
                The use of TEI for metadata is, along with formats like EAD, MARC and Dublin
                    Core, found in several other projects.5. The William Blake Archive
                            &lt;&gt; uses TEI for
                        manuscript description. See also three papers from DRH'97 &lt;&gt;: "Integrating data
                        and metadata in the digital library: SGML and other approaches" by MacKenzie
                        Smith, Harvard University Libraries; "EAD at the Library of Congress: a
                        progress report" by Lee Ellen Friedland, Library of Congress; and "Linking
                        word and image: two TEI-based imaging projects" by Richard Gartner, Pearson
                        New Media Librarian, Bodleian Library, Oxford. In the first version
                    of the register, it was a single SGML file using a small subset of TEI Lite. The
                    links to the facsimiles were contained in the register for each letter, but
                    there were no links to transcriptions, as the aim of the project was to make
                    facsimiles, and not transcripts. But, as we will see later, this kind of
                    information is included at a different level.
                As in other projects using TEI for metadata, we soon faced a file size
                        problem.6. "SGML solution can obviate many of these problems:
                        [...] It can, however, lead to extremely large documents when the collection
                        is large." MacKenzie Smith, op.cit. We decided to convert the TEI
                    file into a database, but we wanted to continue using the TEI format for
                    delivery. We use PERL scripts to link the database to a HTTP interface. The
                    search page is written in HTML, while the user can choose to have the result of
                    a search delivered as a TEI lite document or as a document containing a HTML
                    table.
                This system presents the results of our project. But printed editions of most of
                    the letters exist in electronic forms. It is important for the users to have
                    access to as much source material concerning Ibsen as possible, provided the
                    quality of the material is of an acceptable standard.
                Therefore, we made an agreement with the Documentation project7.
                            &lt;&gt;  to include
                    searches in their database of classical Norwegian literary texts as a part of
                    our presentation. This made it possible to include a link to a text version of
                    each letter, together with the link to the facsimiles.
                This system can be described using the library catalogue metaphor: The register
                    database corresponds to the card catalogue. A search in this database will
                    produce "cards" pointing to the online resources. Some questions regarding
                    integration of the different source materials will be discussed in this
                    context.
                A main problem with publishing letters as described above is that it does not
                    show clearly in which way the letters are part of an exchange between two
                    persons. Letters to Ibsen from some persons, e.g. the author Bjørnstjerne
                    Bjørnson, are also published in digital form by the Documentation project. We
                    will demonstrate a user interface that shows the two participants in a letter
                    exchange as a TEI document presenting the letters in chronological order, with
                    facsimiles and text when they are available. Some of the difficulties we faced
                    in this work will be discussed.
                Most letter exchanges will be part of a vast international web. No single
                    institution, nor single country, can publish a complete set. Possibilities to
                    use our approach for integration of collections and registries of letters will
                    be discussed. A long-term goal is a system where all digitally available letter
                    registers and collections worldwide are available through an integrated search
                    system. This would be an important step in the direction of a digital library
                    with an organization based on content, not on the locations of paper
                    collections.
            
        
    
