


    
        
            
                Word sense disambiguation using cross-lingual
                    inform
                
                    
                        Nancy
                        Ide
                        Department of Computer Science Vassar
                                College
                            Ide@cs.vassar.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                It is well known that the most nagging issue for word sense disambiguation (WSD)
                    is the definition of just what a word sense is. At its base, the problem is a
                    philosophical and linguistic one that is far from being resolved. However, work
                    in automated language processing has led to efforts to find practical means to
                    distinguish word senses, at least to the degree that they are useful for natural
                    language processing tasks such as summarization, document retrieval, and machine
                    translation. Several criteria have been suggested and exploited to automatically
                    determine the sense of a word in context, including syntactic behavior, semantic
                    and pragmatic knowledge, and especially in more recent empirical studies, word
                    co-occurrence within syntactic relations (e.g., Hearst, 1991; Yarowsky, 1993),
                    words co-occurring in global context (e.g., Gale et al., 1993; Yarowsky, 1992;
                    Schütze, 1992, 1993), etc. No clear criteria have emerged, however, and the
                    problem continues to loom large for WSD work.
                The notion that cross-lingual comparison can be useful for sense disambiguation
                    has served as a basis for some recent work on WSD. For example, Brown et al.
                    (1991) and Gale et al. (1992a, 1993) used the parallel, aligned Hansard Corpus
                    of Canadian Parliamentary debates for WSD, and Dagan et al. (1991) and Dagan and
                    Itai (1994) used monolingual corpora of Hebrew and German and a bilingual
                    dictionary. These studies rely on the assumption that the mapping between words
                    and word senses varies significantly among languages. For example, the word duty
                    in English translates into French as devoir in its obligation sense, and impôt
                    in its tax sense. By determining the translation equivalent of duty in a
                    parallel French text, the correct sense of the English word is identified. These
                    studies exploit this information in order to gather co-occurrence data for the
                    different senses, which is then used to disambiguate new texts. In related work,
                    Dyvik (1998) used patterns of translational relations in an English-Norwegian
                    parallel corpus (ENPC, Oslo University) to define semantic properties such as
                    synonymy, ambiguity, vagueness, and semantic fields and suggested a derivation
                    of semantic representations for signs (e.g., lexemes), capturing semantic
                    relationships such as hyponymy etc., from such translational relations.
                Recently, Resnik and Yarowsky (1997) suggested that for the purposes of WSD, the
                    different senses of a word could be determined by considering only sense
                    distinctions that are lexicalized cross-linguistically. In particular, they
                    propose that some set of target languages be identified, and that the sense
                    distinctions to be considered for language processing applications and
                    evaluation be restricted to those that are realized lexically in some minimum
                    subset of those languages. This idea would seem to provide an answer, at least
                    in part, to the problem of determining different senses of a word: intuitively,
                    one assumes that if another language lexicalizes a word in two or more ways,
                    there must be a conceptual motivation. If we look at enough languages, we would
                    be likely to find the significant lexical differences that delimit different
                    senses of a word.
                However, this suggestion raises several questions. For instance, it is well known
                    that many ambiguities are preserved across languages (for example, the French
                    intérêt and the English interest), especially languages that are relatively
                    closely related, such as English and French. Assuming this problem can be
                    overcome, should differences found in closely related languages be given lesser
                    (or greater) weight than those found in more distantly related languages? More
                    generally, which languages should be considered for this exercise? All
                    languages? Closely related languages? Languages from different language
                    families? A mixture of the two? How many languages would be "enough" to provide
                    adequate information for this purpose?
                There is also the question of the criteria that would be used to establish that a
                    sense distinction is "lexicalized cross-linguistically". How consistent must the
                    distinction be? Does it mean that two concepts are expressed by mutually
                    non-interchangeable lexical items in some significant number of other languages,
                    or need it only be the case that the option of a different lexicalization exists
                    in a certain percentage of cases?
                This paper attempts to provide some preliminary answers to these questions, in
                    order to eventually determine the degree to which the use of parallel data is
                    viable to determine sense distinctions, and if so, the ways in which this
                    information might be used. Given the lack of large parallel texts across
                    multiple languages, the study is necessarily limited; however, close examination
                    of a small sample of parallel data can, as a first step, provide the basis and
                    direction for more extensive studies. I have used parallel, aligned versions of
                    George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four (Erjavec and Ide, 1998) in five languages:
                    English, Slovene, Estonian, Romanian, and Czech.The Orwell parallel
                        corpus also includes versions of Nineteen-Eighty
                            Four in Hungarian, Bulgarian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Serbian, and
                        Russian.  The study therefore involves languages from four language
                    families (Germanic, Slavic, Finno-Ugrec, and Romance), as well as two languages
                    from the same family (Czech and Slovene). Four ambiguous English words were
                    considered in this study: hard, line, head, and country. Line and hard were
                    chosen because they have served in various WSD studies to date (e.g., Leacock et
                    al, 1993) and a corpus of occurrences of these words from the Wall Street
                    Journal corpus was generously made available for comparison. Serve, another word
                    frequently used in these studies, did not appear frequently enough in the Orwell
                    text to be considered, nor did any other suitable ambiguous verb. Country and
                    head were chosen as substitutes because they appeared frequently enough for
                    consideration.
                All sentences containing an occurrence or occurrences (including morphological
                    variants) of each of the three words were extracted from the English text,
                    together with the parallel sentences in which they occur in the texts of the
                    four comparison languages (Czech, Estonian, Romanian, Slovene). The English
                    occurrences were grouped into senses, using the relatively coarse sense
                    distinctions in the Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary (OALD)Note
                        that sense divisions for line and hard can be very fine in larger, standard
                        dictionaries, often involving dozens of senses (e.g., in the Collins English Dictionary, line as a noun has 63
                        senses) (used to provide sense distinctions in WordNet [Miller et
                    al., 1990; Fellbaum, forthcoming]). The sense categorization was performed by
                    the author and two student assistants; results from the three were compared and
                    a final, mutually agreeable grouping was established.
                For each of the four comparison languages, the corpus of sense-grouped parallel
                    sentences for English and that language was sent to a linguist and native
                    speaker of the comparison language. The linguists were asked to provide the
                    following information for each word occurrence:
                        1. Provide the lexical item in each parallel sentence that corresponds
                            to the ambiguous English word. If it is inflected, provide both the
                            inflected form and the root form.
                        2. Is the translation one-to-one (i.e., the English word is translated
                            by a single word in your language)? If not, please provide the phrase
                            (or other means) by which it is translated, or indicate that it is not
                            lexicalized.
                        3. Are there obvious synonyms for the word in your language that could
                            have been used instead of the one chosen? Are they better or worse as
                            translations?
                        4. f a given word in any one of its senses is translated using
                            different words in your language (for example, if a word in the "not
                            soft" sense of "hard" is translated differently in different sentences),
                            please indicate why this difference may exist. For example, is it due to
                            the use of a more general term (hyponym)? a more specific word
                            (hypernym)? a different sense?
                        5. Is any of the translations of one of the ambiguous words itself
                            ambiguous in your language? Is the ambiguity the same as in the English?
                            If not, is the word ambiguous among different meanings than those for
                            which it is ambiguous in English? If so, what are its other
                            meanings?
                    
                In order to determine the degree to which the assigned sense distinctions from
                    the OALD correspond to translation equivalents, a coherence index (CI) was
                    computed that measures the consistency with which a given sense is translated as
                    well as the degree of relationship between two senses. CIs were also computed
                    for each language individually. A simple correlation was then run over all the
                    CI data, providing an index of the degree to which there is an affinity (or
                    disaffinity) between the different senses of a given word in each of these
                    groups. Finally, in order to determine the degree to which the linguistic
                    relation between languages may affect coherence, a correlation was run among CIs
                    for all pairs of the four target languages.
                The results, which will be fully outlined in the final paper, show that
                    cross-lingual information may be useful for automatic disambiguation, especially
                    for gross sense distinctions. More interestingly, the data suggest that
                    translation equivalents may provide a valuable source of information for
                    determining sense distinctions, by providing an indication of the relatedness
                    between sense s of a given word that are derived from standard dictionaries. In
                    particular, the CI's can be used to define a "map" depicting the relative
                    distance between senses. This information can in turn serve as a basis for
                    collapsing two senses when the cross-lingual data suggest that their meanings
                    are nearly interchangeable or for recognizing them as relatively distinct. An
                    even more promising approach for sense determination is to use information about
                    translation equivalents to group word occurrences into sense clusters without
                    assigning or considering senses defined a priori in a dictionary. We are
                    exploring this last idea and will have additional results to report in the final
                    paper.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ido
                                    Dagan
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Alon
                                    Itai
                                
                            
                            Word sense disambiguation using a second language
                                monolingual corpus
                        
                        
                            Computational Linguistics
                            
                                20
                                4
                                563-596
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ido
                                    Dagan
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Alon
                                    Itai
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Ulrike
                                    Schwall
                                
                            
                            Two languages are more informative than one
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the
                                Association for Computational Linguistics, 18-21 June 1991,
                                Berkeley, California
                            
                                
                                
                                1991
                                130-137
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Helge
                                    Dyvik
                                
                            
                            Translations as Semantic Mirrors
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of Workshop W13: Multilinguality in the
                                lexicon II, The 13th Biennial European Conference on Artificial
                                Intelligence (ECAI 98), Brighton, UK
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                                24-44
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Tomaz
                                    Erjavec
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Nancy
                                    Ide
                                
                            
                            The MULTEXT-EAST Corpus
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the First International Conference on
                                Language Resources and Evaluation, 27-30 May 1998, Granada
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                                971-74
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christiane
                                    Fellbaum
                                
                            
                            WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database
                            
                                Cambridge, Massachusetts
                                MIT Press
                                (forthcoming)
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    William
                                    A.
                                    Gale
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Kenneth
                                    W.
                                    Church
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Yarowsky
                                
                            
                            A method for disambiguating word senses in a large
                                corpus
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                26
                                
                                415-439
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Marti
                                    A.
                                    Hearst
                                
                            
                            Noun homograph disambiguation using local context in
                                large corpora
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the 7th Annual Conference of the
                                University of Waterloo Centre for the New OED and Text Research,
                                Oxford, United Kingdom
                            
                                
                                
                                1991
                                1-19
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Claudia
                                    Leacock
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Geoffrey
                                    Towell
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Ellen
                                    Voorhees
                                
                            
                            Corpus-based statistical sense resolution
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the ARPA Human Language Technology
                                Workshop
                            
                                San Francisco
                                Morgan Kaufman
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Dan
                                    I.
                                    Melamed
                                
                            
                            Measuring Semantic Entropy
                        
                        
                            ACL-SIGLEX Workshop Tagging Text with Lexical
                                Semantics: Why, What, and How? April 4-5, 1997, Washington,
                                D.C.
                            
                                
                                
                                1997
                                41-46
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    George
                                    A.
                                    Miller
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Richard
                                    T.
                                    Beckwith
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Christine
                                    D.
                                    Fellbaum
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Derek
                                    Gross
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Katherine
                                    J.
                                    Miller
                                
                            
                            WordNet: An on-line lexical database
                        
                        
                            International Journal of Lexicography
                            
                                3
                                4
                                235-244
                                1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Philip
                                    Resnik
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Yarowsky
                                
                            
                            A perspective on word sense disambiguation methods and
                                their evaluation
                        
                        
                            ACL-SIGLEX Workshop Tagging Text with Lexical
                                Semantics: Why, What, and How? April 4-5, 1997, Washington,
                                D.C.
                            
                                
                                
                                1997b
                                79-86
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Hinrich
                                    Schütze
                                
                            
                            Dimensions of meaning
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of Supercomputing '92
                            
                                Los Alamitos, California
                                IEEE Computer Society Press
                                1992
                                787-796
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Hinrich
                                    Schütze
                                
                            
                            Word space
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Stephen
                                    J.
                                    Hanson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jack
                                    D.
                                    Cowan
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Lee
                                    Giles
                                
                            
                            Advances in Neural Information Processing
                                Systems
                            
                                San Mateo, California
                                Morgan Kauffman
                                1993
                                895-902
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Yarowsky
                                
                            
                            Word sense disambiguation using statistical models of
                                Roget's categories trained on large corpora
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
                                Computational Linguistics, COLING'92, 23-28 August, Nantes,
                                France
                            
                                
                                
                                1992
                                454-460
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Yarowsky
                                
                            
                            One sense per collocation
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the ARPA Human Language Technology
                                Workshop, Princeton, New Jersey
                            
                                
                                
                                1993
                                266-271
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
