


    
        
            
                Pedagogy goes to the movies: hypermedia in the cinema
                    class room.
                
                    
                        Adrian
                        Miles
                        Department of Communication Studies RMIT
                                University
                            adrian.miles@rmit.edu.au
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Bonza is a colloquial Australian term that means, more or less, "great" or
                    "excellent," and is the name of an undergraduate cinema studies project at RMIT
                    University (). This project is an
                    applied research subject where students develop and exercise significant
                    research skills in a discipline area, and then apply this research in the
                    writing (or production) of complex, interlinked, hypermedia essays. In all
                    aspects of the project great care has been taken to ensure that the technologies
                    used are affordable, available, and scalable.
                Cinema studies as a field of teaching has always availed itself of new
                    technologies. It was among the first humanities disciplines to actively use the
                    VCR, and regularly employs what are now known as 'multimedia' technologies to
                    assist in teaching. The use of new digital technologies by cinema studies, in
                    particular online learning resources and hypermedia, has followed what is now
                    the established paradigm for such work with content being distributed in various
                    electronic formats (CDROM and WWW for instance) but with the result that
                    students' experience of writing on the cinema remains firmly entrenched in a
                    conservative paradigm of textual description and theoretical application.
                    Through a peer owned online relational database, combined with hypermedia
                    writing, students in the bonza project are able to significantly alter their
                    perception and practice of cinema studies, but more generally a teaching
                    methodology is being explored that encourages students to develop link
                    'competency' producing 'knowledge objects,' which in rare instances demonstrate
                    'deep' linking and cognitive understanding.
                Bonza consists of two related practices, the first involves students undertaking
                    primary research in a self nominated field relating to Australian cinema studies
                    where they are encouraged to use as many resources and media types as available.
                    This material is digitised, and all bibliographic, biographical, and production
                    information entered into the appropriate database. As these databases are
                    relational, direct connections between their own, and each others, research
                    becomes apparent. This allows students to not only pursue particular research
                    themes with ease, but it encourages collaboration as they find related material
                    contributed by their peers. In addition the connections that the database
                    establishes automatically amongst material encourages students to recognise the
                    manner in which their object of study is strongly interrelated (thematically,
                    institutionally, theoretically) and not actually a discrete or individual
                    entity.
                This can be described as 'shallow' link building, as the connections being found
                    are generally literal and the result of simple string matches based on names,
                    and while much of the primary research students undertake has already made
                    significant contributions to Australian cinema historiography, it is the
                    possibility of writing 'deep' link structures in hypermedia that best expresses
                    a student's understanding of their research material.
                This is a key feature of the pedagogy employed in this project, as it is the
                    ability to write with, and amongst, media types, and to link them freely, that
                    distinguishes hypermedia writing from other digital pedagogic practices. This is
                    the method developed by the RMIT HyperText Project where digital literacy is
                    defined as a writing practice rather than a reading or delivery methodology.
                As the subject seeks to encourage the development of research skills and the
                    production of link rich 'knowledge objects' students can write up their research
                    adopting whatever authorial voice or style they wish. This is a pragmatic
                    response to the manner in which the 'traditional' academic essay tends to stymie
                    students in their novel use of hypermedia as a writing tool, particularly their
                    desire (and anxiety) to demonstrate, argue for, and legitimate a specific
                    theoretical thesis. The linearity that usually results, and their anxiety about
                    the 'outside' of their writing -- that is all that is marginal, contrary, or
                    simply unable to be incorporated due to media type or size -- is an aspect of
                    formal and traditional writing practices, that a free authorial voice partially
                    bypasses.
                However, it is in the performance of what could be described as 'link
                    competency,' that is the recognition that links are not merely navigational aids
                    within a work but represent rhetorical or cognitive associations that are able
                    to generate and express logical metastructures, that students develop 'deep'
                    linking and write what Entwistle and Marton have described, in another context,
                    as "knowledge objects" (Entwistle and Marton, 1993). Research, in this model,
                    becomes contextually rich and writing becomes a game or strategy of bricolage --
                    more or less successful, which at its best is exemplary (Gee, 1998), and its
                    worse produces radial texts that tend towards reportage (Lim, 1998).
                While most student work tends towards the two extremes of the radial and the
                    saturated (Lim, 1998 and 36, 1998) what remains to be developed, and it isn't
                    yet clear how this will be achieved in the short term, is an adequate pedagogy
                    of 'deep linking' where students are able to build these knowledge objects
                    through not only combining media types or maximising link use but through the
                    development of coherent thematic and contextual associations across writing and
                    media types. What is apparent to date is that students require considerable time
                    writing their material for this to happen, where rewriting needs to become a
                    continual rebuilding of the relations between already established parts.
                This difficulty is hardly surprising given students unfamiliarity with the
                    medium, and the paucity of academic examples available. That this is the case in
                    cinema studies only exacerbates what could be characterised as the tyranny of
                    the word (and node) in academic hypertext practice, and while bonza is a
                    beginning along this path, it is hoped that new pedagogies may develop that are
                    able to facilitate the students' construction and identification of relations
                    between parts. It is clear that if we regard the digital as only a mechanism for
                    the delivery of pedagogy then we are not only constraining the learning that our
                    students might achieve, but we remain fixed within conservative genres of what
                    constitutes a possible academic writing practice.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Eloise
                                    36
                                
                            
                            Helen Twelvetrees
                        
                        
                            bonza
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt; Accessed April 23, 1999.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jay
                                    David
                                    Bolter
                                
                            
                            Writing Space: The Computer, Hypertext, and the History
                                of Writing
                            
                                Hillsdale (N.J.)
                                Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    John
                                    Eklund
                                
                            
                            Cognitive Models for Structuring Hypermedia and
                                Implications for Learning from the World-Wide Web
                        
                        
                            AusWeb95
                            
                                
                                
                                1996
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt; Accessed May 1, 1998. 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Noel
                                    Entwistle
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Ference
                                    Marton
                                
                            
                            Knowledge Objects: Understandings Constituted Through
                                Intensive Academic Study
                        
                        
                            EQARD Occasional Paper
                            
                                93
                                4
                                
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Caroline
                                    Gee
                                
                            
                            Desert Landscape in Australian Feature Films
                        
                        
                            bonza
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        &lt;&lt; Accessed April 23, 1999.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Institute for Advanced Technology in the
                                Humanities
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt; Accessed October
                            17, 1998.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Joyce
                                
                            
                            New Stories for New Readers: Contour, Coherence and
                                Constructive Hypertext
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ilana
                                    Snyder
                                
                            
                            Page to Screen: Taking Literacy into the Electronic
                                Era
                            
                                Sydney
                                Allen and Unwin
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Kolb
                                
                            
                            Socrates in the Labyrinth: Hypertext, Argument,
                                Philosophy
                            
                                Watertown
                                Eastgate Systems
                                n.d.
                            
                        
                        Computer Software
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    George
                                    P.
                                    Landow
                                
                            
                            Hypertext: The Convergence of Contemporary Critical
                                Theory and Technology
                            
                                Baltimore
                                Johns Hopkins University Press
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Diana
                                    Laurillard
                                
                            
                            Rethinking University Teaching: A Framework for the
                                Effective Use of Educational Technology
                            
                                London
                                Routledge
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Penny
                                    Lim
                                
                            
                            Peter Doyle
                        
                        
                            bonza
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt; Accessed April 23, 1999. 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Peter
                                    Ling
                                
                            
                            Evaluating Teaching Initiatives which Employ Resource
                                Based Learning: Draft For Review and Discussion
                        
                        
                            UltiBase: A World Wide Web Service for Tertiary
                                Educators
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt; Accessed July 24, 1998. 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Adrian
                                    Miles
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Deb
                                    Verhoeven
                                
                            
                            bonza
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt; Accessed December
                            12, 1998.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Adrian
                                    Miles
                                
                            
                            Singin' in the Rain: A
                                Hypertextual Reading
                        
                        
                            Postmodern Culture
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        Accessed May 8, 1998. Vol. &lt;&gt;
                            mirrored at &lt;gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Adrian
                                    Miles
                                
                            
                            RMIT Communication Studies HyperText Project
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt; Accessed
                            December 12, 1998. 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ilana
                                    Snyder
                                
                            
                            Page to Screen: Taking Literacy into the Electronic
                                Era
                            
                                Sydney
                                Allen and Unwin
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
