


    
        
            
                The History Courseware CD-Rom: Core Resources for
                    Historians
                
                    
                        Sonja
                        Cameron
                        
                            CTI Centre for History, Archaeology and Art
                                History
                            s.cameron@arts.gla.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    The CD Rom, Core Resources for Historians, was produced by the TLTP History
                        Courseware Consortium at Glasgow University. This was the work of 26 authors
                        at 20 different institutions with Glasgow University acting as the lead
                        site. The Consortium produced 12 tutorials which are grouped into four
                        themes: Women's History, The Coming of Mass Politics, Industrial Revolution
                        and Post-industrialisation, and the Pre-modern Period. The twelve tutorials
                        have been designed to aid the teaching of history students using computer
                        technology. Each tutorial is centred around a lecture written by a subject
                        specialist, enriched by supporting examples and supplementary resources.
                    The twelve multi-media tutorials contain over 2000 primary and secondary
                        sources, some of them unique to this software, which would have only been
                        accessible to professional historians.
                    All tutorials are in html format which maximises user friendliness, promotes
                        movement and flexibility and enables easy integration into existing history
                        courses. The open-ended design provides various pathways through the
                        material and allows students to access material in more depth and breadth
                        than with a traditional textbook.
                    The tutorials were designed from the outset to be easily customized enabling
                        them to be adapted for local teachinig requirements.
                    The CD has been in used in a variety of ways at universities in the British
                        Isles for a year. It can be used as a supplementary resource, as a lecture,
                        tutorial or module replacement, as a companion for an entire course or form
                        the centre of a whole on-line course. It can be used for individual or
                        teamwork assignments, to promote independent learning and teamwork skills
                        whilst enhancing the traditional historians skills of analysis,
                        interpretation and decision making.
                    Implementation is supported by a full time Academic Support Officer, a
                        programme of introductory and advanced workshops, technical helpdesk and a
                        dedicated users web site.
                    The Courseware Consortium is currently in the process of obtaining copyright
                        clearance for use of the CD Rom in the USA, and it is expected that it will
                        be available within the next year.
                    It is intended to give a short general presentation, lasting perhaps 15-20
                        minutes, on the CD Rom and its contents, with some reference to its
                        implementation at selected universities, followed by a demonstration session
                        in which conference participants can explore the CD Rom by themselves and
                        ask any relevant questions.
                    The presentation will require an overhead display linked to a PC running
                        Office 97 (in particular Powerpoint) on Windows 95 or 98. For the
                        demonstration, the overhead display plus a PC running Netscape or Internet
                        Explorer is required.
                
                
                    Presenter
                    Sonja Cameron graduated with a Ph.D. in History from the University of
                        Aberdeen, Scotland, in 1992. Since then she has taught medieval Scottish
                        history at the universities of Glasgow, Edinburgh, and Aberdeen. In
                        addition, she has been involved in various computing projects. Since October
                        1998 she is History Co-ordinator for the Computers in Teaching Initiative,
                        funded by the Higher Education Funding Councils of the British Isles.
                
            
        
    
