


    
        
            
                Meaning and Metadata: Managing Information in a Visual
                    Resource Reference Collection
                
                    
                        Judith
                        Thomas
                        Digital Media Center Clemons Library University of Virginia
                            judith@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The University of Virginia Library is in the process of building a reference
                    collection of visual images to support research in the humanities.On
                        the nature of library support for digital image collection: Lynch, Clifford
                        "The Uncertain Future for Digital Visual Collections in the University,"
                            Archives and Museum Informatics 11(1997):
                        5-13. The means and methods of creating, managing, and distributing
                    this kind of electronic information are still under debate in the visual
                    resource community, where the alphabet soup that characterizes the image
                    standards environment is thick with metadata possibilities. This presentation
                    will focus on identifying a semantic standard and defining a syntactic model for
                    the description of images.
                Image metadata creators must make both syntactic and semantic choices to organize
                    and describe their data; these choices reflect their understanding of the scope,
                    function, and usage patterns of a collection and are based on underlying
                    assumptions for scholarly inquiry in a specific discipline.For an
                        ethnographic analysis of the application of standards in a mixed
                        physical-digital visual resources collection, see: Marshall, Catherine C.,
                        "Making Metadata: a study of metadata creation for a mixed physical-digital
                        collection, Digital Libraries 98: the Third ACM Conference
                            on Digital Libraries, ed. Ian Witten. New York: Association for
                        Computing Machinery, 1981.  Metadata creators must be prepared to act
                    as interpreters of content and context, assigning meaning within a chosen frame
                    of reference.
                 The interpretive role given to creators of both the syntax and semantics of
                    image description is supported by the very framework for presentation and
                    analysis of visual material that has developed over centuries of art historical
                        inquiry.Panofsky, Erwin, Meaning in the Visual
                            Arts. New York: Penguin Books, 1955, p. 30. In
                    traditional analysis, the language of form is re-expressed through the spoken or
                    written word: the act of description confers meaning to the object.
                Defining descriptive standards for works or art does reinforce this reliance on
                    text-based interpretationsThe very phenomenon of thumbnails as
                        metadata has the potential to reduce the reliance on words to explain
                        images. The presentation of large amounts of visual data into a scholarly
                            Gestalt will bypass semantic associations
                        and offer a more unmediated recognition of form.: and implies an
                    understanding of the verbal codings of the 'subject' of a work, its "of-ness" or
                        "about-ness."Layne, Sara Shatford, "Some Issues in the Indexing
                        of Images," Journal of the American Society for Information
                            Science 45,8 (1994): 585-588. Ambiguities and
                    inconsistencies are inevitable when description depends on so many layers of
                    individual interpretation of meaning.Stephenson, Christie, and
                        Patricia McClung, Delivering Digital Images: Cultural
                            Heritage Resources for Education. Los Angeles: The Getty
                        Information Institute, 1998.  The challenge remains to design a
                    descriptive model that is based on standards yet is flexible enough to allow the
                    tying together of seemingly disparate elements with the thread of a unifying
                        idea.On "Analogy in an Age of Difference," see Stafford, Barbara
                        Jane, Good Looking, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,
                        1996. pp. 200ff.
                Image description does present considerable challenges in defining an appropriate
                    and inclusive model. Issues of organization, hierarchy, relation, and surrogacy
                    are critical to defining content and context and must be considered when
                    deciding whether or how to give access to individual media objects as well as to
                    'natural' groupings of materials.On the creation of a shared
                        knowledge model to bridge descriptive differences, see Bearman, David, and
                        Jennifer Trant, "Unifying our Cultural Memory ," July 1, 1998, UKOLN;
                        available at &lt;&gt;.
                    
                Several different electronic encoding schemes are currently used to describe
                    image collections, with varying degress of success,The work of McRae
                        and White is notable for their attempts to adapt MARC to the description of
                        images of architecture. McRae, Linda, and Lynda S. White, eds., ArtMARC Soucebook: Cataloging Art, Architecture and Their
                            Digital Images. Chicago: American Library Association,
                        1998 and this paper will briefly review such efforts as the
                    Categories for the Description of Works of Art &lt;&gt;, the ICOM-CIDOC
                    model, CIMI's standardization efforts &lt;&gt;,
                    the VRA Core &lt;&gt;,
                    and others. Important to our effort is the Dublin Core, a metadata set designed
                    to support resource discovery in a networked environment, which has been adapted
                    for the description of image collections in several projects &lt;&gt;.For
                        a fascinating article on reconciling metadata requirements from the Dublin
                        Core and INDECS/DOI communities see Bearman, David, et.al., "A Common Model
                        to Support Interoperable Metadata," D-Lib Magazine
                        5, 1 (January 1999); &lt;&gt;.
                So, useful semantics for image description do exist. Although the Dublin Core is
                    intended for resource discovery, the development of qualifiers to the simple
                    15-element set makes it a powerful and flexible metadata set for images. CIMI's
                    Dublin Core Metadata Testbed Working Group has demonstrated the feasibility of
                    this element set to the world of museum objects. What's missing then from the
                    picture is the syntactic model that gives expression to these elements and to
                    the relationships among the elements and to other information sources.
                The descriptive model for images that we have developed at UVa is one building
                    block in the digital library architecture being designed under the direction of
                    Thornton Staples, the Director of Digital Library Research and Development. It
                    is intended from the outset to be expressed in SGML/XML, since its multi-level
                    hierarchy and system of inheritances would be denied complete expression in a
                    relational database. The image description model embeds in each level of the
                    hierarchy a full Dublin Core element set, defining each level as a "logical
                    cluster of metadata" and thus adhering to the 1:1 principle of description in
                    the Dublin Core (DC).Bearman, "A Common Model to Support
                        Interoperable Metadata,", p. 16.
                
                At the top level of the hierarchy is a Work. This Work can be expressed as a core
                    (DC), and, at the next level down in the hierarchy, can contain one or more
                    components. Each component of the model must itself contain a descriptive DC
                    core - and/or other components. Components themselves can be targets to other
                    works, or to components or elements in the same or different work. The semantics
                    of the Dublin Core allow for description of the agents involved in the creation
                    or production of the work, its components, the surrogates, or even the
                    metadata.
                
                The system of inheritances is such that the values of the elements of any level
                    of the hierarchy are carried to the levels below it unlesss they are explicitly
                    replaced by new values.
                This model solves many of the troublesome problems of image description. A
                    building can have multiple building dates with various architects responsible
                    for different portions; a polyptypch can be attributed to several artists and
                    its panels distributed among different museums. Both can be adequately described
                    according to this scheme. Best practices will include recommendations for data
                    entry, standard vocabularies and schemes for the different elements, but the
                    modular nature of the information structure will allow for extensibility and
                    flexibility in terms of granularity and collection groupings, and ultimately,
                    points of view.
            
        
    
