


    
        
            
                Technologizing Women's Travel Writing: Issues &amp;
                    Implications
                
                    
                        Miranda
                        Beaven
                        Remnek
                        University Libraries University of
                                Minnesota
                            m-remn@tc.umn.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Mary
                        Skemp
                        University Libraries University of
                                Minnesota
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Sarah
                        Wadsworth
                        University Libraries University of
                                Minnesota
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Recent developments in feminist criticism and electronic text have
                        revolutionized humanities scholarship. By decentering canonical works, they
                        liberate marginalized writers, and provide alternative criteria for textual
                        interpretation. A new wave of scholarship has highlighted travel narratives
                        as rich sources for understanding women's identity. Digitization provides
                        access to these sources, and strengthen interdisciplinary connections.
                    The Electronic Text Research Center at the University of Minnesota Libraries
                        is thus engaged in a project entitled Women's Travel Writing, 1830-1930. WTW
                        selects feminist texts not in wide circulation and encodes them to
                        facilitate textual analysis. We focus on American travellers, but include
                        selected European women. We emphasize Africa and Latin America, but are
                        beginning to cover the Far East and North America, as well as certain themes
                        (eg. texts by women naturalists).
                    WTW uses XML-compliant DynaWeb software to deliver TEI-encoded texts over the
                        Web. In addition to support for research, our project has a strong teaching
                        mission. We assist both faculty and students in learning more about
                        digitized texts, and their potential teaching uses. There are three modes of
                        access: 1.Basic Full-text Search; 2.Expanded (Thesaurus) Search; 3.
                        Analytical (Metadata) Search. Our work has raised issues in three main
                        areas: gender; language; geography.
                
                
                    I. Text Encoding and Gender Identity
                    Travel writing by women has been doubly marginalized. It has not been
                        accorded the same value as male writing. Moreover, travel writing as a genre
                        is marginalized. While the American literary "canon" includes travel
                        accounts, these are narratives or fictional works by men like John Smith and
                        Samuel Clemens. WTW provides a valuable corrective by publishing female
                        travel narratives spanning the years 1830-1930. This period is of interest
                        in terms of national expansion, colonialism, and new opportunities for
                        geographical and intellectual exploration by women.
                    Our first phase of development has involved selection, digitization, and
                        structural encoding. Our goal is a sample of significant texts, emphasizing
                        those that are less accessible. The second phase involves enhancing the
                        texts with analytical categories. These enable the user to conduct searches
                        for thematic and cultural analysis. A user may retrieve all paragraphs that
                        contain specific content even if they lack the keywords of a word search.
                        Thus, a search for tags will retrieve passages dealing with women as
                        students, whether or not the word "education" appears in the text.
                    Creating a taxonomy of markup categories presents a challenge. There is
                        potential for limitless intervention in the text--a cause for unease on the
                        part of many. The possibilities for analytical encoding are various, and
                        subject to interpretation by encoders. Limiting the scope helps ensure
                        consistent markup and the allocation of resources to the expansion of the
                        archive (rather than the endless markup of a few texts). Two of the
                        categories determined by our steering committee ("Ethnicity" and
                        "Transportation") derive from features of travel writing. The others
                        ("Gender Marking"and "Women's Occupations") derive from women's writing
                        itself. Clearly, "gender" is an essential category that we use to reflect
                        male dominance, or transgression of gender lines. Admittedly, the categories
                        are politically- and ideologically-charged, but these four groups are likely
                        to be of the greatest interest to most users. And since a major project goal
                        is to help students read the texts critically and intelligently, we will
                        have met our goal nicely if our encoding is merely suggestive. It has been
                        noted that SGML-encoded text "has qualities of intelligence" that allow "us
                        to focus on the problems that interest us most and hold the rest in
                        abeyance". In the case of data tagged with categories like gender and
                        ethnicity, this observation is doubly true.
                
                
                    2. Language Issues: Facilitating Undergraduate Access to Non-English
                        Travel Sources
                    WTW has emphasized English-language texts. But SGML-based interpretive
                        categories can help render foreign-language sources more accessible.
                        Consider a text by Flora Tristan: Pérégrinations d'une
                            paria (1833-34). In this account of travel to Peru, Tristan
                        reminisces about her unionizing experiences. A digitized copy is available
                        to a French civilization class which includes coverage of the worker's
                        movement. Working class history is difficult to recreate because of the lack
                        of sources; the material is also difficult because of textual "otherness."
                        There are three levels of estrangement: linguistic, geographic, and
                        historical. The first is not always problematic. But the instructor must
                        also deal with student alienation caused by a foreign text's "other"
                        differences (historical and geographic). These are compounded in Tristan's
                        memoir--since she was a French woman travelling in Peru. The challenge is to
                        decrease these differences for the American student.
                    We attempt this by encoding vital categories of "difference": gender, class,
                        and politics. Parts of the text are linked to broaden the context of the
                        theme treated. This gives students a different method to collect data. The
                        categories become critical tools through which they study images, symbols,
                        and stylistics. Each category used for the Tristan text is subdivided. Gender is divided into "male," "female," and
                        "other." Class is subdivided into "privilege,"
                        "working class," "wealth" and "poverty." Politics is encoded according to references to revolution and
                        the labor movement.
                    Consider a section in which Tristan describes the costume of Lima and how it
                        functions in the daily activity of women. In Tristan's discourse, the women
                        become an allegory of the idea of Freedom. This interpretation must be
                        understood in the context of Tristan's own experiences as a French woman
                        whose husband's problems have motivated her travel to Peru. And we have used
                        details found in the text's three prefaces to elucidate her presentation of
                        Peruvian culture and politics. The first preface is a dedication, the second a philosophical essay revealing her political thought, and the
                        third an autobiographical essay. We have linked
                        the prefaces and narrative to draw out the personal politics behind
                        Tristan's text. Not used as in other WTW texts, in this narrative "Gender:
                        women" represents the appropriation of a custom particular to women in a
                        foreign culture as a symbol through which the author exposes her own desires
                        and reasons for writing.
                    For example, in the travel section we encoded: "On doit... aire remarquer
                        combien le costume des Liméniennes est favorable et seconde leur
                        intelligence pour leur faire acquérir la grande liberté... dont elle
                        jouissent." From the philosophical essay we
                        encoded: "On a observé que le degré de civilisation auquel les diverses
                        sociétés humaines sont parvenues a toujours été proportionné au degré
                        d'indépendence dont y ont joui les femmes." The student can thus understand
                        how the description of sayas and women of Lima supports Tristan's politics
                        as described in her prefaces.
                
                
                    3. Geographic Issues: Obstacles and Possibilities
                    Issues of geography are clearly intrinsic to the primary texts with which we
                        deal. Although our work in this area has not progressed as far as in the
                        first two categories, we are nevertheless developing new access mechanisms
                        in two main areas:
                            Image map access from our project website;
                            Thesaurus-based place name searches
                        
                
            
        
        
            
                Partial Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Julia
                                    Flanders
                                
                            
                            The Body Encoded: Questions of Gender and the
                                Electronic Text
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    K.
                                    Sutherland
                                
                            
                            Electronic Text: Investigations in Method and
                                Theory
                            
                                Oxford
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Mary
                                    Suzanne
                                    Shriber
                                
                            
                            Introduction
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Shriber
                                
                            
                            Telling Tales: Selected Writings by Nineteenth-Century
                                American Women Abroad
                            
                                DeKalb
                                
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Kathryn
                                    Sutherland
                                
                            
                            Challenging Assumptions: Women Writers and New
                                Technology
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    W.
                                    Chernaik
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Davis
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Deegan
                                
                            
                            The Politics of Electronic Text
                            
                                Oxford
                                
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
