


    
        
            
                The Spoken Dutch Corpus Project
                
                    
                        Nelleke
                        Oostdijk
                        Faculty of Arts Nijmegen University
                            N.Oostdijk@let.kun.nl
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                As one of the smaller languages in Europe, Dutch is under serious threat of
                    gradually disappearing as it is losing ground to English. In the European
                    setting the English language is being used increasingly more widely, not just in
                    international communication but also in business, economics and other areas of
                    interest. The availability of the necessary resources has placed the
                    English-language-based language and speech technology in the leading position it
                    holds today and has thus further strengthened the position of English in
                    general. The fact that to date for Dutch the relevant language resources
                    available are but few forms a serious complication for the advancement of Dutch
                    language and speech technology. Therefore in June 1998 the Spoken Dutch Corpus
                    Project was started.This publication was supported by the
                        Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) under grant number
                        014-17-510.
                The project aims at the compilation and annotation of a 10-million-word corpus of
                    contemporary standard Dutch as spoken in the Netherlands and Flanders. It is
                    funded jointly by the Flemish and Dutch governments and the Netherlands
                    Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) and has a budget of some 4.5 million
                    EURO. The entire corpus will be orthographically transcribed and annotated with
                    part-of-speech information. A selection of one million words will be analysed
                    in-depth, including a phonological, phonetic and prosodic transcription, and
                    syntactic analysis. The corpus, together with the recordings, will be made
                    available for scientific research. It will be distributed on CD-ROM by the Dutch
                    Language Union.
            
        
    
