


    
        
            
                Expanding the Community: The Museums and the Online
                    Archive of California (MOAC) Project
                
                    
                        Mary
                        J.
                        Elings
                        The Bancroft Library University of
                                California
                            melings@library.berkeley.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Eva
                        Garcelon
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    Museums, archives, and special collections hold important and unique primary
                        source materials which, with the advent of networked computing technologies,
                        are being made available online to users around the world. Early projects
                        within the archival and library communities have looked at the feasibility
                        and technical issues of making these resources available in a networked
                        environment using open standards for information delivery.
                    Among the most notable of these early efforts was the development of Encoded Archival Description (EAD), an SGML
                        encoding and descriptive standard maintained by the Library of Congress and
                        the Society of American Archivists. The development of EAD has fostered
                        numerous follow on projects, the aim of which have been to test and expand
                        the capabilities of this new encoding standard for the description and
                        delivery of online primary source materials. One of the most significant of
                        these has been the creation of the California Digital Library's Online Archive of California (OAC), the largest
                        union database of EAD finding aids in the country, which includes finding
                        aids for both manuscript and pictorial collections from throughout the
                        state.
                    With projects like the OAC and other EAD projects across the country,
                        archives and libraries have implemented this new standard as the preferred
                        method for making their content rich materials available on the internet.
                        With this, interest in using EAD has spread to other communities with
                        similar holdings, such as museums.
                
                
                    MOAC Project
                    The Museums and the Online Archive of California
                        (MOAC) project is a collaborative endeavor between archives and museums
                        looking at implementing the EAD standard for museum and special collections.
                        The MOAC project will develop a prototype "virtual museum and special
                        collections archive" that integrates standardized EAD finding aids for these
                        collections into a single source, thus providing access to important primary
                        sources from multiple repositories across California.
                    The MOAC project is the first large-scale project that will attempt a museum
                        implementation of EAD. The nine participating partners (the Berkeley Art
                        Museum/Pacific Film Archive, the Hearst Museum of Anthropology, the Oakland
                        Museum of California, the Grunwald Center for the Graphic Arts, the
                        UCR/California Museum of Photography, The Bancroft Library, the Cantor Arts
                        Center at Stanford University, the Japanese American National Museum, and
                        the Fowler Museum of Cultural History) will build a testbed of over 30 EAD
                        collection finding aids linked to approximately 37,000 images.
                    The MOAC project will address such issues as interoperability of data, use of
                        descriptive standards and vocabularies within the EAD format, centralized
                        and de-centralized models for data creation and delivery (URLs and URNs),
                        and providing for workflows that can accommodate many different types of
                        institutions, both those that are economically and technologically rich and
                        those that are not. By successfully developing its EAD implementation
                        guidelines within the context of the existing OAC
                            Guidelines, the project will make it possible for the OAC to
                        expand to include more museum collections in the future.
                
                
                    Case Study
                    As part of this project, The Bancroft Library has just completed The Honeyman Collection Digital Archive project, a
                        one-year project to make The Robert B. Honeyman Jr.
                            Collection of Early Californian and Western American Pictorial
                            Material available on the internet. The Honeyman project is a
                        participant and the first major contributor to the MOAC project.
                    The Honeyman collection is comprised of over 2300 items dated from ca. 1790
                        to ca. 1930, including original oil paintings, watercolors, drawings,
                        prints, ephemera and other materials related to the old West, with emphasis
                        on the early California and Gold Rush periods. The Honeyman project sought
                        to obtain full bibliographic control over the collection through creation of
                        USMARC records; a comprehensive and detailed EAD finding aid; and archival
                        digital images of all items hyperlinked to descriptions. The project used
                        descriptive standards from both the archive and museum communities to
                        structure the project database (developed in Microsoft Access 97) and
                        followed established cataloging rules and created internal conventions for
                        data capture.
                    Based on guidelines agreed upon by the MOAC partners, the Honeyman project
                        resulted in detailed online description of the collection. Each image is
                        accompanied by information such as creator name, dates, nationality and
                        role; title, date and place of publication, call number, materials and
                        technique, content description, notes and inscriptions, and subject and
                        genre/format headings. Within the EAD structure the above information is
                        tagged based on type and therefore allows for content-specific
                        searching.
                    The Honeyman Collection Digital Archive is among the first EAD finding aids
                        to provide this level of access to a pictorial collection, as well as to use
                        controlled vocabulary within the item-level record, and will serve as a
                        prototype model for the development of the MOAC project. By demonstrating
                        the feasibility of providing detailed description using community standards
                        and controlled terminology to facilitate access, it is hoped that the MOAC
                        project model will be of significance to the archival and museum
                        communities, as well as to other cultural heritage communities.
                
                
                    Community and End-User Benefit
                    This wealth of collections-related cultural knowledge contained in art,
                        history, and anthropology museums will enrich OAC as a resource for
                        humanities research and education. Collections like the Honeyman and other
                        MOAC contributors, could have significance not only to those interested in
                        the history of California, but also in art history, urban development,
                        sociology, environmental studies and many other disciplines. By gathering
                        these resources into a single source union database, the user can search and
                        retrieve these rich documents without having to go to each institution
                        separately.
                    The main goal of the MOAC project is to make these important and unique
                        primary source materials easily accessible online. In the past, access to
                        many of these materials has been restricted to those who could come to the
                        institutions to view them. By making these materials available on the
                        internet, it is hoped that more users will have an opportunity to explore
                        the rich and diverse holdings of our shared cultural heritage. But
                        technology is only part of the equation; without content, community
                        involvement, and efforts like the MOAC project, our rich resources will
                        remain inaccessible to all but a few individuals.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            Development of the Encoded Archival Description
                                Document Type Definition
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        : &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            Digital Historical Collections: Types, Elements, And
                                Construction
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        : &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            Honeyman Digital Archive
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        : &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            Museums and the Online Archive of California
                                (MOAC)
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        : &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            Online Archives of California (OAC)
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        : &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            California Heritage Project
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        : &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            EAD @ UC Berkeley
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        : &lt;&gt;
                    
                
            
        
    
