


    
        
            
                Assessing Faculty-Student Collaboration on Humanities
                    Computing Projects
                
                    
                        S.
                        Mark
                        Lewis
                        Academic Computing/German Regis College
                            mark.lewis@regiscollege.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                There seems to be no immediate solution to the ever-growing tech support crisis
                    on college campuses. Most students "burn out" in this role faster than in most
                    other work study jobs. Yet a handful of student lab consultants have been asking
                    for more rewarding challenges on the job than those of fixing printer problems
                    and software incompatibilities. Intellectual curiosity is often a factor.
                    Especially in the humanities, it has become important for these students to find
                    meaningful links between campus technology tools and their studies. Together,
                    faculty and computer center directors often hold the key to helping students
                    take on a more active role in project development.
                This poster presentation focuses on student practitioners of humanities
                    computing, their involvement in faculty-sponsored computing projects, and the
                    creation of mechanisms for assessing their experiences. An assessment survey has
                    been used which takes into account a variety of factors, including project
                    goals, work conditions, time, guidance, and value of contribution. The four
                    diverse case types of faculty-student collaboration featured in my poster
                    session will no doubt look familiar to many faculty. By sharing these early
                    models with faculty at several conferences, I hope to encourage broader
                    participation in my study. The goal of the study is to promote continued
                    generation and funding of humanities computing projects based on the
                    increasingly important role of the student in this area.
            
        
    
