


    
        
            
                Overview of Computer Supported Medieval Slavic
                    Manuscript Studies in Bulgaria
                
                    
                        Milena
                        Dobreva
                        
                            Institute of Mathematics and Informatics
                            dobreva@math.bas.bg
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Background
                    The medieval Slavic manuscript heritage is rich and widely spread. The exact
                        number of Slavic manuscripts is unknown. Only in Bulgaria, the state-owned
                        repositories store about 8,000 manuscripts of Slavic origin.
                    These texts have been created in an interesting cultural setting. The use of
                        a vernacular language with many regional differences at the orthographic,
                        lexical and phrase-structure levels makes the medieval texts an important
                        source for the study of the diachronic and synchronic development of Slavic
                        languages. The fact that a comparison of 150 variants of a sentence from the
                        Gospel does not result in two ideal matches is a brilliant illustration of
                        the variety scale.
                    The application of computer tools to the medieval Slavic text studies could
                        facilitate research tasks, especially those, which require analysis of text
                        variants. This explains the interest of the specialists to the IT
                        applications. 
                    This paper aims at presenting the state of the field in Bulgaria. It also
                        points to the basic unsolved problem - the development of proper text
                        encoding system, which will enable the encoding of the medieval Slavic texts
                        close to the originals.
                
                
                    First endeavors in the field
                    The first applications of IT to the medieval Slavic studies have not been
                        aimed at collecting and processing texts in electronic form, but rather to
                        collecting structured information about the manuscripts [Geurts et al.
                        87].
                    The creation of formal models was the basic
                        difficulty in the beginning. Due to the unique researchers' profiles and
                        interests, the views on the data to be stored and processed were
                        significantly different.
                    Initially, the samples of original texts were encoded in Latin
                        transliteration. This was a practical solution but it was unsatisfactory for
                        the specialists who would like to be able to represent the texts as close to
                        the original as it would be possible.
                
                
                    Current state
                    With the further development of information technologies and the spread of
                        Windows-based applications, a new stage of the work has been achieved. The
                        specialists' dream -- to see the text in a form close to the original,
                        already was viewed as easily reachable. The specialists were concerned with
                        the development of fonts presenting accurately the paleographic features
                        characteristic for different periods, schools or scribes. However, a major
                        problem -- that of creating adequate text encoding standard -- remained
                        unsolved. The problems with the creation of an encoding system are presented
                        thoroughly in [Birnbaum 96], but his encoding suggestions are still not
                        implemented in practice.
                    The difficulties in creating widely accepted encoding standard are caused by
                        several reasons:
                            1. The sets of graphemes appearing in different manuscripts are
                                different. In some cases the difference of graphemes represents
                                character differences; in other cases these were variants of the
                                same character.
                            2. The encoding of specific textual features (e.g. superscript,
                                subscript, inscript letters and abbreviations) is still debatable.
                                Some of the specialists insist on encoding normalized texts where all these features disappear. For
                                others, the encoding of the text in a form, which represents the
                                original as close as possible, is a must. But even if we have a
                                satisfactory encoding standard, we will need to build tools enabling
                                search within encoded texts. The 'normalization' approach leads to
                                better solution of the problem with text search, paying the price of
                                data loss.
                        
                    A brief overview of 70 publications from 1995-1998 in the field of computer
                        processing of medieval Slavic manuscripts shows that 40 publications treat
                        text representation and processing, including TEI issues. Articles on data
                        base applications form the next largest group (10 publications). Multimedia,
                        AI applications and preservation issues appear in isolated cases. This study
                        was done on the material of [Birnbaum et al. 96], [Dobreva 98] and
                        publications by Bulgarian authors published in other editions (the complete
                        bibliography is published on [KNIGCHIJ-SCRIBE].
                    The major projects which were undertaken in Bulgaria up till now, include:
                            1. Experiments with data base applications for cataloguing
                                manuscripts [Geurts et al. 87].
                            2. Computer Repertory of Old Slavic Manuscripts
                                    and Letters based on TEI-conformant description of
                                medieval manuscripts [Miltenova 98].
                            3. Quantitative study of orthographic variety [Dobreva, Dobrev
                                98].
                            4. Lexicographic study of the Psalter using the DBT system
                                [Camuglia 96].
                        
                
                
                    Conclusions
                    Although the Bulgarian specialists already have practical experience in
                        different computer applications to the medieval Slavic studies, the basic
                        problem of developing internationally recognized encoding system is still
                        unsolved. Under these circumstances, the efforts to collect digital
                        resources are prone. This situation is unpleasant in general, and in
                        countries in transition with many economic problems is a real disaster.
                    Important characteristic of the work in the field is that the most
                        considerable effort is oriented towards text encoding. Real digitization
                        work is still not undertaken. This can be explained with the economic
                        difficulties of the Bulgarian institutions working in the field of medieval
                        manuscript heritage.
                    With the above in mind, we could expect that Slavic materials would still
                        remain underrepresented in electronic form compared to manuscripts belonging
                        to other written traditions.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Birnbaum
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Bojadzhiev
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Dobreva
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Miltenova
                                
                            
                            Proceedings of the First International Conference
                                Computer Processing of Medieval Slavic Manuscripts, July 1995,
                                Blagoevgrad, S.
                            
                                
                                
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Birnbaum
                                
                            
                            Standardizing Characters, Glyphs, and SGML Entities for
                                Encoding Early Cyrillic Writing
                        
                        
                            Computer Standards and Interfaces
                            
                                18
                                
                                201-252
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Camuglia
                                
                            
                            The Psalter, its Tradition and the Computer: a New
                                Method of Textual Analysis
                        
                        
                            Palaeobulgarica
                            
                                XX
                                1
                                3-13
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Dobreva
                                
                            
                            Text Variety in the Witnesses of Medieval Texts:
                                Proceedings of Int. Workshop, Sofia, September 1997
                            
                                Sofia
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Dobreva
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    Dobrev
                                
                            
                            Orthographic Variety in Medieval Slavic Texts: How to
                                Study and Model It?
                        
                        
                            ALLC-ACH'98, Conference abstracts, July 5-10 1998,
                                Debrecen, Hungary
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                                36-38
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    J.
                                    Geurts
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Gruijs
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    van Krieken
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    W.
                                    R.
                                    Veder
                                
                            
                            Codicography and Computer
                        
                        
                            Polata knigopisnaja
                            
                                17-18
                                
                                4-29
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            The Website on Digitizing Slavic Manuscripts in
                                Bulgaria
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                    

                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Miltenova
                                
                            
                            Computer Repertory of Medieval Literature and
                                Letters
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Dobreva
                                
                            
                            Text Variety in the Witnesses of Medieval Texts:
                                Proceedings of Int. Workshop, Sofia, September 1997
                            
                                Sofia
                                
                                1998
                                138-149
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
