


    
        
            
                Encoding a Transcript of the Beowulf Manuscript in
                    SGML
                
                    
                        Elizabeth
                        Solopova
                        Department of English University of
                                Kentucky
                            esolop@pop.uky.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Electronic Beowulf Project is a joint project of the University of Kentucky
                    and the British Library and has made available on CD-ROM high resolution images
                    of the manuscript and its early transcripts, together with commentary, glossary,
                    and searchable transcription and edition of the poem. The edition and the
                    transcript have been encoded in SGML to enable the users to search for editorial
                    decisions such as restorations and emendations in the edition, and for
                    palaeographical features and various types of scribal activity in the
                    transcript. Particular features which are now searchable as a result of encoding
                    the transcript include: scribal abbreviations, additions, deletions and
                    corrections, missing text and characters damaged or concealed by restoration
                    attempts.
                The Beowulf manuscript suffered damage from the fire of the Cottonian library in
                    1731 which destroyed or damaged a significant proportion of the text, making
                    textual restoration a near impossible task. Quite apart from the fire damage the
                    manuscript presents various palaeographical and textual problems, and has been a
                    subject of considerable scholarly controversy in recent years. Individual
                    readings in the poem often depend on complex evidence from different sources
                    including seventeenth and nineteenth-century transcripts of Beowulf, from
                    back-lighting, ultraviolet photography and, more recently, digital image
                    processing, as well as the study of spelling and scribal habits throughout the
                    entire Nowell codex of which Beowulf is a part. The Electronic Beowulf Project
                    has brought together a wide range of textual information about the poem, making
                    it easily accessible for re-evaluation and further research. The textual
                    material has been encoded with SGML which, whilst not strictly TEI-conformant,
                    is indebted to the TEI for both the original inspiration and for individual
                    encoding decisions. The markup records a wealth of minute palaeographical and
                    textual detail in both the transcript and the edition of the poem. This paper
                    will briefly discuss the development of the DTD before looking at a selection of
                    the markup problems encountered in the encoding of the Beeowulf transcript.
                    Finally, I is hoped to demonstrate the usefulness of the encoding for specific
                    searches within the Electronic Beowulf CD-ROM.
                The first group of encoding problems is represented by cases where the feature
                    which needs to be encoded is actually smaller than the smallest segment of the
                    electronic text - the character. Examples include: the erasure or deletion of a
                    character's minim by underdotting (or indeed added by the scribe); damaged or
                    partly-obscured letters, especially on the edges of a fire-damaged or
                    partly-restored folio. Any editorial restoration of damaged or concealed
                    characters needs to be accompanied by the evidence for a particular reading,
                    often incomplete and based on a range of sources. The editor's comments
                    referring to damaged letters range from 'only descender survives', to 'part of
                    the letter survives', to 'only traces are preserved'. The TEI Guidelines offer a
                    method for describing such instances within its primary documents tag set. The
                    element &lt;DAMAGE&gt;, for example, has an attribute EXTENT which, according to
                    the TEI Guidelines, can have values such as "half-letter", "minim" etc. However
                    a similar attribute is not available for other elements such as &lt;DEL&gt; (for
                    deletions). The Electronic Beowulf Project developed both descriptive notes and
                    customized elements and attributes to accommodate these features.
                Multiple scribal alterations carried out in a particular sequence offer another
                    set of encoding problems. For example, the editorial note which accompanies the
                    reading, 'aet' in the transcript reads, 'Originally "seah", but "e" underdotted,
                    "eah" crossed out, and "aet" written over it in the same hand'. All types of
                    scribal activity mentioned in this context, such as the additions and various
                    types of deletions, are commonly encountered in the manuscript separately and
                    encoded with a corresponding set of elements and attributes. However,
                    multi-scribal activity not only defy conventions which work well for the large
                    majority of simpler cases, but present particular difficulties in the need to
                    record the order in which the alterations took place.
                A third group of difficult cases concern the presence of ambiguity in the
                    material itself where the encoding had to reflect the unavailability of a
                    straightforward interpretation. An example of this is described in the following
                    editorial note: 'After "dream", traces of erased or faded letters, sometimes
                    restored as "ic", appear to be bottoms of "h" and "e" under ultraviolet light'.
                    The uncertainty expressed in the editorial note presents an encoding problem,
                    even though elements for both faded and erased text were broadly used in the
                    encoding of the Beowulf transcript. A similar difficulty occurs when a
                    particular feature falls under two or more categories distinguished within the
                    markup system. Thus a common method of deletion in Anglo-Saxon manuscripts is
                    underdotting a letter or a word. On the other hand a point beneath the line is
                    commonly used by one of the Beowulf scribes to indicate the place where
                    additions written above the line were intended to belong. There are cases
                    however, where it is impossible to say whether a point beneath the line is an
                    insertion or a deletion mark for in fact it stands for both.
                Finally the paper will discuss the use of cross-referencing and the recording of
                    additional information in the markup to represent the complex evidence for
                    individual readings in Beowulf. Thus, the encoding may record that a particular
                    word is missing from the manuscript whilst also recording that its presence in
                    the edition is a result of an editorial restoration based on the
                    seventeenth-century Thorkelin transcripts. The markup, therefore, also serves to
                    indicate something of the status of the reading in the transcripts in order to
                    supply the reader with as much information as possible. This is particularly
                    important given that some readings in the Thorkelin transcripts appear to be a
                    later additions and so already lost from the manuscript when the transcripts
                    were made, casting doubt on usually reliable source of evidence. The paper will
                    discuss the integration of this essential but descriptive material into the
                    textual markup and the subsequent display of the search results on the
                    CD-ROM.
            
        
    
