


    
        
            
                Humanities Computing and the Rise of New Media Centers:
                    Synergy or Disjunction?
                
                    
                        Allen
                        Renear
                        Scholarly Technology Group Brown
                                University
                            allen_renear@brown.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Espen
                        Aarseth
                        Department of Humanistic Informatics University of Bergen
                            aarseth@uib.no
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Nancy
                        Kaplan
                        School of Communications Design University of
                                Baltimore
                            nakaplan@ubmail.ubalt.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Matthew
                        G.
                        Kirschenbaum
                        Department of English University of
                                Kentucky
                            mgk3k@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        John
                        Unsworth
                        Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities University of Virginia
                            jmu2m@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        John
                        Lavagnino
                        Center for Humanities Computing King's College
                                London
                            John.Lavagnino@kcl.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        ACH Panel
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Allen Renear, Moderator
                
                    Summary of Topic
                    Empirically, humanities computing is easily recognized as a particular
                        academic domain and community. We have our professional organizations,
                        regular conferences, journals, and a number of centers, departments, and
                        other organizational units. A sense for the substance of the field is also
                        fairly easy to come by: one can examine the proceedings of ACH/ALLC
                        conferences, issues of CHum and JALLC, the discussions on HUMANIST, the
                        contents of many books and anthologies which represent themselves as
                        presenting work in humanities computing, and the academic curricula and
                        research programs at humanities computing centers and departments. From such
                        an exercise one easily gets a rough and ready sense of what we are about,
                        and considerable reassurance, if any is needed, that indeed, there is
                        something which we are about.
                    But computing humanists have never been comfortable with the unexamined life,
                        and, not surprisingly we have had, like many other academic communities, a
                        little anxiety about exactly how we fit into the more established ecology of
                        disciplines, fields, methodologies, and the like. Some of this concern may
                        be a purely intellectual curiousity, some may be more existential - and
                        certainly some is motivated by a practical concern about how to shape our
                        institutions and our professional lives in a way that will allow us to make
                        our best contributions. (Any discussion of the nature of humanities
                        computing must of course reflect the seminal work of Willard McCarty - see
                        the papers listed on ).
                    The recent explosive growth in use of computers by humanists - by all
                        academics in fact - has added a twist to these ruminations: today all
                        humanists are computing humanists, even if all are not professionally
                        engaged in humanities computing. This reminds us that, in fact, it is not
                        just using computers that distinguishes us as members of the humanities
                        computing community, but how we use them, or how we think about this use. In
                        addition, and probably even more importantly, the growth in computer use
                        suggests that the theories, methods, and techniques which our community has
                        been developing over the last 25 years are now vitally relevant to all
                        humanists - which should move our community center-stage in the academic
                        world.
                    Against this background comes a striking and thought-provoking recent
                        phenomenon: the very rapid development of centers and programs for the study
                        of New Media or Digital Media. These centers seem to be distinguished by
                        such things as a focus on digital media and culture in particular rather
                        than cultural products in general, a relative de-emphasis of traditional
                        disciplinary methodologies from the humanities, and an incorporation of
                        production as a fundamental aspect of their work. Now common in both Europe
                        and the United States, they are sometimes staffed by researchers who are
                        also part of the ACH/ALLC humanities computing community, but just as often
                        by academics whose background is completely different and who have had no
                        involvement with this community.
                    At first glance new media studies (NMS) and traditional humanities computing
                        (HC) may not appear to have a lot in common, at least their most
                        characteristic problems seem exclusive and distinctive: HC's techniques for
                        concordance development, or carefully thought-out markup of texts, contrast
                        vividly with, for instance, NMS's multimedia production projects, or
                        theories about the politics of virtual reality. But a closer look also
                        suggests considerable similarity, and, in fact, there seem to be at least
                        some common problems and projects. HC, for instance, has long had a general
                        analytical interest in digital culture, conducting multi-disciplinary
                        analyses of multimedia systems, educational technology, the use of
                        technology in the arts, and the use of technology in publication and
                        communication - and certainly nothing digital is alien to the HUMANIST.
                    One particularly distinctive feature of NMS is the way it seems to have taken
                        to heart Robert Scholes' prescription that the production component should
                        be restored to humanistic studies. In The Rise and Fall of English Scholes
                        claims that in English studies, rhetoric as oratory gave way first to the
                        philosophy of rhetoric and then to philology and, finally Theory - and that
                        we are all the worse for it. Is this a deep difference between NMS and HC?
                        Perhaps, but then again members of the HC community are certainly among the
                        busiest producers in humanities: they are typically hands-on practitioners
                        creating electronic primary sources of all kinds, as well as multimedia
                        systems and computer tools.
                    But perhaps any effort to establish some principle of differentiation is not
                        only idle, but could obscure the opportunities presented by the
                        commonalities of these two communities. In this spirit the goal of the panel
                        is to investigate the relationship of new media studies to established
                        humanities computing not so much as an exercise in taxonomizing practices
                        and disciplines, but more to share ideas and see how these two communities
                        can continue to learn from each other and collaborate.
                
            
        
    
