


    
        
            
                Tanach Cantillation Concordance: A unique way to look
                    at the Hebrew Bible
                
                    
                        László
                        Hunyadi
                        Andrew W. Mellon Fellow Albright Institute of
                                Archeological Research,, Jerusalem Dept. of General and
                            Applied Linguistics KLTE, Debrecen, Hungary
                                hunyadi@llab2.arts.klte.hu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    I. Purpose of work
                    There is a long history of the study of the Tanach, the Hebrew Bible (the
                        Five Books of Moses, the Prophets and the Holy Scriptures). Several
                        disciplines have studied its important properties from various viewpoints.
                        The theological, historical, literary as well as linguistic interest of
                        philologists of all times has largely been based on the contextual and
                        textual analysis of the Tanach. Such an analysis is facilitated by
                        concordances, special dictionary-like elaborations of the text, which
                        consist of lists of identical word-forms in their textual environment thus
                        enabling the researcher to study words (and concepts reflected by these
                        words) as well as longer expressions (and more complex concepts) in all
                        their occurences. Research has been based on such concordances actually for
                        centuries now.
                    With time passing and Hebrew less and less remaining a spoken language, it
                        became a necessity to preserve the original sense of the individual texts.
                        More than a millenium ago, schools were established in Palestine to find
                        ways of indicating the original sense of the texts by designing a special
                        set of signs to accompany the original consonantal version. Two such sets
                        were set up: one for the denotation of vowels (the nikuds, for grammatical
                        information) and one for the denotation of cantillation (the trops, for
                        melodies of public reading). Since the function of the latter was to
                        preserve the primary semantic and communicative properties of the text, and
                        since these properties have well-established formal (syntactic) relevance,
                        the indication of the melodic structure by the cantillation signs also
                        yields significant syntactic and semantic information about the text
                        itself.
                    However informative these signs can be, research has practically been
                        oriented to just the primary aspect of the text, i.e., to its consonantal
                        form, the form scriptures were traditionally written in: concordances, the
                        basic tools of textual research have only considered these consonantal
                        forms. It is with the Tanach Cantillation Concordance that research can now
                        enter a fundamentally new phase. The Tanach Cantillation Concordance offers
                        a very special organization of text based on standard concordance format.
                        Texts are not only organized by consonants (as usual conocordances are), but
                        by vowels (nikuds) and cantillation signs (tropes) as well. It results in
                        concordances in which it is not only consonantal forms of words and
                        expression that can be found and grouped together with their appropriate
                        textual environment, but vowel patterns aand cantillation patterns as well.
                        The result is something similar to a hypothetical dictionary of, say, the
                        music of Beethoven, where, in addition to a list of all the musical sounds
                        (and their environments) used by the composer, all the rhythmic patterns of
                        his music, regardless of the tunes they are realized in, are listed.
                    Similarly, this Tanach Cantillation Concordance offers the researcher the
                        chance to view not only the words and their environment of the biblical
                        text, but also all the possible combinations of the cantillation marks,
                        i.e., all the possible structural cantillation units of public reading. And
                        all this in a combination of alphabetization and vocalization as well as in
                        the natural Hebrew textual environment, essential features, which the only
                        cantillation condordance known to the author to have been published so far
                        does not offer.
                    At last, since these signs have a direct relation to the syntactic structure
                        of the text as well, this concordance gives the unique chance to researchers
                        to unfold the syntactic properties of all the texts of the Tanach. In this
                        way, one can derive a linguistic representation of the texts similar to what
                        is nowadays called 'parsing'; with a very important difference, however:
                        parsing is made today by the help of computers, whereas those parsings were
                        made by hand during many decades more than a thousand years ago. What is
                        still common in them is that one needs computers to bring to light these
                        hidden features of the ancient texts.
                
                
                    II. Description of work
                    
                        A. What the Tanach Cantillation Concordance does and what it does not 
                                What it does
                                        1. It is a concordance of the complete Tanach, based
                                            on the Soncino Classic Collection CD-ROM, published by
                                            Davka, 1996.
                                        2. It displays actual Biblical text.
                                        3. Search has been done according to the alphabet, the
                                            vowel signs and the cantillation signs both separately
                                            and in combination (about a hundred various
                                            searches).
                                        4. As a result of these combinations, the various
                                            lists generated show 
                                                a. identical roots with different vocalization
                                                  and accentuation;
                                                b. dentical vocalization patterns with
                                                  different roots and accentuation;
                                                c. identical accentuation patterns with
                                                  different roots and vocalization.
                                            
                                        5. Searches are of two kinds:
                                                a. they basically follow the patterns of the
                                                  disjunctive accents in their possible combination
                                                  with conjunctives, as described in earlier
                                                  descriptive work showing the various actual
                                                  patterns of the primary accent clauses, including
                                                  atnah andsilluq;
                                                b. there are certain lists which show the
                                                  secondary accent clauses, such as tipcha-mercha
                                                  and tipcha-munah.
                                            
                                        6. Lists are of two kinds:
                                                a. alphabetical/vocalization/accentuation
                                                  (unordered)
                                                b. ordered by frequency.
                                            
                                        7.References are given by book and chapter.
                                        8.It is an a tergo concordance which makes it possible
                                            to group together different roots with identical
                                            morphological endings.
                                    
                                What it does not do 
                                        1. It does not make a morphological/lexical analysis
                                            of the word-forms.
                                        2. It is not a descriptive approach to cantillation:
                                            it does not describe the sequence of occurences of
                                            cantillation signs in a verse, instead, it lists all the
                                            occurences of prescribed cantillation patterns.
                                    
                                However, all the actual sequences of the cantillation signs
                                    are retreavable from the core list.
                            
                        B. Some advantages of the Torah Cantillation Concordance
                                1. It is based on the complete Tanach.
                                2. It reflects the accuracy of the Soncino Tanach.
                                3. With no numerical codes but actual Biblical text displayed,
                                    it is easily readable.
                                4. With its searches based on the alphabet, the vowel signs as
                                    well as the cantillation signs, it combines the advantages of
                                    both the traditional (alphabetical) concordances and the
                                    existing cantillation concordance.
                                5. Its a tergo feature of listing offers all the benefits of
                                    reverse alphabetizing without making a compromise to traditional
                                    values of concordances.
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
