


    
        
            
                Using &lt;TEXT&gt; in TEI Markup.
                
                    
                        Paul
                        Caton
                        
                            Women Writers Project
                            Brown University
                            paul@swansong.stg.brown.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Text Encoding Initiative's DTD has a liberal content model for the
                    &lt;TEXT&gt; element (Sperberg-McQueen and Burnard 1994, 1192). Because the DTD
                    requires &lt;TEXT&gt; at a high level, the relative liberality of the content
                    model helps the markup scheme apply to a wide range of humanities documents.
                    However, a data resource is only useful if the data are consistent in type of
                    form and content. In the case of SGML-encoded texts,
                    while a validating parser can check the form of the data the encoding project
                    must enforce consistency in the type of content.
                The need for data consistency generates a principle of contextual equivalence,
                    namely that an element &lt;FOO&gt; should always mark the same kind of content
                    regardless of where that content occurs.Note that the reverse is not
                        true: the same piece of content may perform different functions according to
                        where it occurs and so may merit different tags in different
                        positions. A related principle is that where two tags may be used for
                    the same piece of content then a reason exists for using one rather than the
                    other that has nothing to do with arbitrariness or convenience but comes instead
                    from the nature or function of the piece of content. These two principles are
                    fundamental to the logic of descriptive markup and they have particular
                    relevance to the use of &lt;TEXT&gt;.Tagging a low-level object as a
                    &lt;TEXT&gt; presupposes that object has a property or quality that makes it
                    something more than just a paragraph, quote, line of verse, etc. According to
                    the principle of contextual equivalence, the quality that makes the low-level
                    object a &lt;TEXT&gt; is the same that makes the high-level object a
                    &lt;TEXT&gt;. In effect, even though the low-level &lt;TEXT&gt; is optional
                    while the high-level &lt;TEXT&gt; is obligatory, it is the possibility of a low-level &lt;TEXT&gt; that imposes a principled
                    condition on what the high-level &lt;TEXT&gt; can be.
                The TEI element set is designed to reflect widely-shared textual concepts:
                    broadly, everyone recognises paragraphs, quotes, dramatic speeches, etc. The
                    association of &lt;TEXT&gt; with "text" is inescapable (whether the generic
                    identifier is "TEXT" or "FOO"). While some uses of "a text" or "the text" do
                    imply nothing more than an arbitrary piece of text (as in, for example, "the
                    text for my sermon today is ....", or the text for a close-reading exercise),
                    many other uses imply an identifiable thing: "a text" as a piece of text with a
                    property or properties not shared by all other pieces of text. That the DTD
                    specifically allows a low-level use of &lt;TEXT&gt; shows that TEI had this more
                    specific concept in mind and wanted to accommodate it. The confusion engendered
                    by this accommodation simply reflects the many different meanings assigned to
                    "text" in everyday use. A workable description of what constitutes a
                    text/&lt;TEXT&gt; must account both for the singularity of a text and for its
                    ability to contain one or more things possessing a similar singularity. The
                    TEI's Guidelines do not do this, so we must look beyond
                    them. A promising place to start is the work of the Russian critic and textual
                    theorist Mikhail Bakhtin, and with one essay in particular, "The Problem of
                    Speech Genres."
                In this essay, written in the early nineteen-fifties but not published in Russian
                    until 1979 and in English until 1986, Bakhtin distinguishes an utterance from a linguistic unit.
                    Linguistic units--words, phrases, clauses, and sentences--are the building
                    blocks of utterances, whilst utterances are the building blocks of
                    communication. Utterances represent the smallest particles in a physics of
                    language in use. Devoid of any communicative context, words, phrases, etc., are
                    simply abstractions: representative examples of the formal properties of the
                    language. Utterances, on the other hand, have unique properties deriving from
                    their communicative context. Many times the boundaries of a linguistic unit and
                    an utterance will coincide, but Bakhtin stresses that "[the] completely new
                    qualities and peculiarities belong not to the sentence that has become the whole
                    utterance, but precisely to the utterance itself" (Bakhtin 1986, 74). Utterances
                    must consist of linguistic units, but linguistic units are not necessarily
                    utterances.
                All utterances have a generic aspect, a form typical to the communicative
                    context. Bakhtin calls these forms speech genres, and he distinguishes between
                    primary and secondary speech genres. Secondary genres are more complex than
                    primary genres because in "the process of their formation, they absorb and
                    digest various primary (simple) genres that have taken form in unmediated speech
                    communion" (Bakhtin 1986, 62). Simple kinds of utterance become compositional
                    units of more complex utterances. For example, Bakhtin points to the genre of
                    the novel which, because it represents human activity contains representations
                    of various utterance types (letters, rejoinders in dialogue, etc.).
                The problem of "a text" versus "a piece of text," which is the problem of
                    deciding what is a &lt;TEXT&gt; and what just a &lt;DIV&gt; or &lt;QUOTE&gt; or
                    &lt;LG&gt;, lies in defining the qualitative difference between what may appear
                    identical pieces of language. Bakhtin's distinction between utterances and
                    linguistic units speaks directly to that problem, and his notions of utterances
                    and primary and secondary speech genres offer an encoding project practical and
                    principled criteria for using &lt;TEXT&gt;. Briefly, these are:
                        &lt;TEXT&gt; applies only to the thing that is the utterance (eg. only
                            to the epistolary novel itself, not to the letters that make it
                            up)
                        for a piece of writing to count as a &lt;TEXT&gt; there must be as
                            much of it as is known to exist (with qualifications for different
                            versions and historical contingency)
                        when one instance of a secondary genre incorporates one or more other
                            instances of secondary genres, and those incorporated instances would on
                            their own qualify as &lt;TEXT&gt;s, then they should be tagged as
                            &lt;TEXT&gt;s within the incorporating &lt;TEXT&gt;
                    
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    M.
                                    Bakhtin
                                
                            
                            The problem of speech genres
                        
                        
                            Speech genres and other late essays
                            
                                translated from the Russian by
                                
                                    Vern
                                    W.
                                    McGee
                                
                            
                            
                                and edited by
                                
                                    Caryl
                                    Emerson
                                
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Holquist
                                
                            
                            
                                Austin, Texas
                                University of Texas Press
                                1986
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Lou
                                    Burnard
                                
                            
                            Guidelines for electronic text encoding and
                                interchange
                            
                                2 vols.
                                Chicago and Oxford
                                Text Encoding Initiative
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
