


    
        
            
                A Text-Based Approach to Electronic Cataloguing of
                    Non-Western Manuscripts
                
                    
                        Kim
                        Plofker
                        History of Mathematics/Scholarly Technology Group Brown University
                            Kim_Plofker@Brown.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        David
                        Pingree
                        History of Mathematics/Scholarly Technology Group Brown University
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The importance of the descriptive catalogue of manuscripts as a bibliographic
                    tool is currently being reaffirmed by the interest shown by various institutions
                    in creating such catalogues on-line. The advantages of an electronic format for
                    such a tool--accessibility, searchability, ease of revision and expansion--are
                    too widely recognized to need explication here. Instead, this paper concentrates
                    on some of the difficulties involved in the attempt to exploit these advantages
                    without sacrificing the usefulness of the mature traditional printed format,
                    particularly in the case of non-Western texts; and on the solutions employed in
                    designing one such project, an electronic descriptive catalogue of some 5000
                    manuscripts from South and West Asia.
                The task of descriptive cataloguing itself, irrespective of the format of the
                    finished product, exhibits a new set of problems to those cataloguers who
                    venture outside the European textual tradition. In the first place, the greater
                    chronological extent of the chirographic tradition in most of Asia, as compared
                    to that in most of Europe (where scribal copying of texts began later and was
                    sooner replaced by printing) means that there are simply more manuscripts from
                    the non-Western world, by some orders of magnitude. Related to this is the
                    comparative lack of bibliographic control for non-Western manuscripts, where the
                    relation among author, text, and manuscript is generally much more obscure than
                    for European ones. Thus any catalogue of such manuscripts must undertake to be
                    also a catalogue of the texts themselves, rather than merely concentrating on
                    the physical characteristics of manuscript instances of known works.
                The same uncertainty permeates almost all other aspects of Asian manuscriptology.
                    Even the subject classifications of known works are not firmly established in
                    all their divisions: although a sufficiently minute classification scheme may
                    exist in the work's indigenous tradition, such schemes are in many cases not yet
                    usefully integrated into Western bibliography. The features of the physical
                    manuscripts are no more tractable than those of their more abstract contents.
                    Since it is neither feasible nor sensible to refrain from cataloguing
                    non-Western manuscripts until all these varied issues of bibliographic and
                    codicological control have been resolved (and indeed, in all probability it is
                    only the knowledge gained through cataloguing attempts that will make it
                    possible to resolve them), the author of such a catalogue must for the present
                    rest satisfied with ensuring that its structure and presentation convey as much
                    information as possible, without giving misleading impressions of certainty
                    where none exists.
                The foregoing brief and simplified description of some challenges peculiar
                    (either in kind or in degree) to making a catalogue of non-Western manuscripts
                    should serve to make it apparent that the electronic finding aid, implemented as
                    or at least based upon a fielded database, is not in all respects the ideal
                    model for producing such a catalogue in electronic form. The searchable fielded
                    database works best with data that conforms well to a highly organized and
                    unambiguous structure, and that can easily be segmented and then reconstructed
                    in an automated process. The varying confidence levels of the information
                    comprised by a catalogue of non-Western manuscripts are not as well suited to
                    this format. Finally, a descriptive catalogue in electronic form should have a
                    structure that is easily converted to that of a conventional printed catalogue,
                    with the standard textual finding aids that electronic search capabilities
                    attempt to mimic and extend.
                These are the considerations that shaped the design of the bio-bibliographical
                    electronic cataloguing project described in this paper, a project now being
                    developed by the American Committee for South Asian Manuscripts (ACSAM). ACSAM
                    will publish over the next few years an on-line version of a Union Descriptive
                    Catalogue containing detailed information about thousands of South and West
                    Asian manuscripts in North America and the texts contained in them. The
                    prototype of the Union Descriptive Catalogue reflects some approaches differing
                    from the design of most traditional electronic finding aids; they were adopted
                    to lessen the tensions described above between the binary logic of computer
                    operations and the ambiguity inherent in describing works and manuscripts
                    outside the European tradition. The chief of these approaches is the abandonment
                    of a fielded database structure in favor of SGML.
                The catalogue's user interface also requires some deviations from that of a more
                    straightforward electronic finding aid, in order to accomodate the unusual
                    nature of the data. Although non-roman scripts will all be represented in roman
                    transliteration, the transliterated characters must include a complete set of
                    diacritical marks in order to provide unambiguous standard scholarly character
                    equivalents for each script. At the same time, the screen representation of
                    these characters must be as little dependent as possible on the advanced
                    capabilities of current hardware and software, since many users will not have
                    access to the latest technology or anything near it. Finally, the search engine
                    will have a customized query manager to augment its existing capabilities of
                    searching for free text and/or by element or attribute type, or structural
                    characteristic. The query manager will employ various "fuzzy matching"
                    techniques to optimize the usefulness of searches whose typical ambiguities will
                    include variant forms or vocalizations of names, comparisons of precise dates or
                    chronological ranges with vague or unknown ones, identification of well-known
                    texts by the European version(s) of their titles, and so forth. The goal of the
                    design as a whole is to use as much as possible of the power of computing
                    capabilities while simultaneously doing no violence to the somewhat amorphous
                    structure of the data.
            
        
    
