


    
        
            
                From the Manuscript to the (Electronic) Edition:
                    Strategies and Tools for Textual Scholarship
                
                    
                        Wilhelm
                        Ott
                        
                            Universitaet Tuebingen
                            Zentrum fuer Datenverarbeitung
                            ott@zdv.uni-tuebingen.de
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Modularity, professionality, portability, integration are key features of the
                    "Tuebingen University System of TExt processing Programs" TUSTEP. Its purpose is
                    to serve as a toolbox for those academic fields where texts (including those
                    written in non-Latin alphabets) are the object of research.
                The demonstration shows how this toolbox can be used to prepare a critical
                    edition. It starts from automatic collation of different versions of a text,
                    which stores all the information necessary for further processing in a file.
                    There follow simple but powerful procedures which allow to automatically
                    distinquish between "substantial" variants (to be listed in the apparatus) and
                    "orthographic only" variants (probably to be discussed only in the editorial
                    preface). The remaining "substantial" variants are then arranged by program in
                    the order necessary for the critical apparatus and are "imported" with
                    appropriate, SGML-style markup into the text for both automatic typesetting and
                    for preparing a hypertext based electronic editon (based, for the demo, on HTML
                    for inspection by a web browser).
                The demostration can -- of course -- show only the "automatic" part of the work,
                    but will also include the tools which help a scholar to gain control over the
                    "manual", intellectual part of his work.
                TUSTEP is currently available for Windows 95/98/NT and UNIX platforms (including
                    Linux; see ).
                    Beyond critical editing (see ), typical
                    applications include the preparation and publication of encyclopedias (like the
                    15-volume "Neuer Pauly", 5 volumes of which have appeared by the end of 1998),
                    dictionaries, bibliographies, indexes and concordances (see ).
            
        
    
