


    
        
            
                Humanities Textual Databases Online: The Cases of TACT
                    and FoxPro in the Digital Library
                
                    
                        Stacy
                        Waters
                        Center for Advanced Research Technology in the Arts and
                            Humanities University of Washington
                            stacy@u.washington.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Much of the work that humanities scholars do is, implicitly or explicitly, the
                    preparation of textual material as a database. On the one hand, almost any
                    descriptively tagged text (or text prepared with editing software that allows
                    the export of tagged files) is, implicitly, a flat, textual database. On the
                    other hand, the use of proprietary database software to organize textual
                    materials makes this connection explicit. The advantage of texts in databases is
                    that they may be queried and searched to reveal information about the text which
                    may be difficult to obtain in a more traditional manner.
                Increasingly, the resources prepared by scholars in one or another database
                    format for their own restricted use are finding their way onto the Internet,
                    where they may be accessed by the larger scholarly community. Many people in the
                    possession of such resources, however, are perplexed about how to go about
                    linking them to the WEB.
                I propose to organize a poster session that will display two examples of textual
                    databases, one flat and the other relational, that have been created at the
                    Center for Advanced Research Technology in the Arts and Humanities (CARTAH) at
                    the University of Washington to be accessible over the Internet. The poster
                    session will illustrate the processes whereby existing databases may be made
                    available online. The methods described are generally applicable and can be
                    utilized by lots of scholars.
            
        
    
