


    
        
            
                English literature, electronic text and computer
                    analysis: An impossible combination?
                
                    
                        Claire
                        Warwick
                        Department of Information Studies University
                                of Sheffield
                            c.warwick@sheffield.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                In 1991 Corns discovered that despite the potential usefulness of computational
                    text analysis techniques in the study of English Literature, very little work
                    had been published in the field which showed any evidence of their use. He hoped
                    that this was due a lack of knowledge on the part of more traditional literary
                    professionals. Knowledge is now more widespread and electronic text and analysis
                    tools easier to find and use. However, the application of the same method of
                    quantitative analysis of the research output in selected journals suggests that
                    computational analysis of English literary texts is no more common now than it
                    was eight years ago. This paper will suggest reasons for this, and argue that
                    the discontinuity between the way that machines and humans read prevents the
                    more widespread use of electronic texts by literary scholars.
                Electronic text is still basically defined in terms of its content. (Renear) Thus
                    the tools which we have at our disposal for analysing electronic literary text
                    work in terms of information extraction. (eg. how many times does a word occur,
                    in what collocation?) Even if the text is encoded, the searches we can perform
                    are more complex versions of a content model. (eg how many times does Hamlet as
                    speaker of the word Ophelia happen as opposed to the reverse?) Computational and
                    corpus linguists have been able to produce a great deal of valuable work, based
                    on this sort of data, yet to date very little has emerged as a result of
                    applying computer analysis of electronic text in the field of English
                    literature.
                Researchers who are interested in tracking cultural or historical patterns in
                    large amounts of data, or charting textual variants may find computational
                    techniques a great use. However, most scholars still believe that the core
                    activity of the literary critic in whatever language is critical analysis and
                    close reading. Although we have not fully understood what we do when we read a
                    literary text, we know that we do not simply collect quantitative data. Reading
                    conflates the activities of information retrieval, (How many times does x
                    occur?); text analysis, when we examine the significance of the data, (i.e.
                    having found out how many times a word occurs, in a given writer, is it
                    different from that of any of his contemporaries, and if so, does it matter to
                    me?) and the identification of emotional effects (I notice that a character
                    tends to be presented in such a way, this determines how I as reader perceive
                    that character and the action in which they are involved). Therefore, while
                    critics may use quantitative data to support further analysis, the definition of
                    'close reading' is much less easy. What we do know is that it involves
                    intangible concepts such as sensibility, originality, creativity and is
                    predicated upon things that are nuanced and unprovable. These characteristics
                    can be comprehended by humans. But they are much more difficult to adapt to the
                    right or wrong, on or off, world of logical hierarchies that are ideal for
                    computer analysis. Furthermore, unlike linguists, literary scholars often do not
                    need large quantities of information in order to come to their judgements, which
                    they admit should not necessarily be absolute or objective. Humanists do not
                    necessarily expect that a problem can be solved once and for all nor that their
                    findings must be incontestable. (Watisboone)
                To make any profitable use of computer techniques of analysis, humans must also
                    be able to define exactly the problem under investigation, what the nature of
                    the data is, and why results are significant. This is something that many
                    English literature scholars find difficult, and this may be a reflection as much
                    of the nature of the subject as the competence of the researcher. Text encoders
                    might suggest that the text under analysis is insufficiently well analysed and
                    marked up for the user's purpose. Perhaps therefore they should spend some time
                    marking up their text. But what should they mark up? Even if they could define
                    the sort of literary nuances that they are looking for, or translate them into
                    an encoding system, would this really be a good use of time? The text would have
                    to be so heavily marked up that the critic might as well just read it
                    anyway.
                Should humanities computing professionals therefore decry the tradition methods
                    of literary scholars as insufficiently objective and rigorous, and try to
                    encourage them to use computational methods to improve their standard of proof?
                    (Smith) We could, but it seems likely to have very little effect on a long
                    standing and still popular academic discipline. Perhaps computers are not
                    ideally suited to the complex analysis of literary text, and perhaps we should
                    accept this. Should we therefore resign ourselves to the terminal disjunction of
                    literary studies and humanities computing? I think not, but we may need to
                    accept that computational methods may leave some areas of the discipline changed
                    and others untouched.
                For example, the most successful use of computers in English literature has been
                    in the fields of text creation and editing. This activity is better suited to
                    the use of electronic text as it relies much more on objectivity, since
                    manuscript A does or does not include a word that manuscript B lacks. There is
                    no debate about this, it is a matter of proof. as a central apart of English
                    studies. This is, in a sense, a move back in the evolution of English literary
                    studies, since the study, display and analysis of textual variants was perceived
                    as the essence of the discipline by its founders. Perhaps the use of computers
                    will redress the balance and re-establish the importance of textual editing.
                    This means that the main use of computers in English literature is
                    presentational rather than analytical. Just as Nineteenth century scholars
                    presented critical editions in print, so a new generation presents them
                    electronically, and it is now for others to decide what to do with them. This
                    may be 'simply' to read them.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    T.
                                    N.
                                    Corns
                                
                            
                            Computers in the humanities: Methods and Applications
                                in the study of English Literature
                        
                        
                            Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing
                            
                                6
                                2
                                127-131
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            Out of Praxis: Three (Meta) Theories of
                                Textuality
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Katherine
                                    Sutherland
                                
                            
                            Electronic Text: Investigations in Method and
                                Theory
                            
                                Oxford
                                Clarendon Press
                                1997
                                107-124
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    B.
                                    Smith
                                
                            
                            Computer Criticism
                        
                        
                            Literary Computing and Literary Criticism: Theoretical
                                and Practical Essays on Theme and Rhetoric
                            
                                Philadelphia
                                University of Pennsylvania Press
                                1989
                                36-49
                                39
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Watisboone
                                
                            
                            The Information Needs and Habits of Humanities
                                Scholars
                        
                        
                            Reference Quarterly
                            
                                34
                                2
                                203-216
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
