


    
        
            
                Scholars in the Digital Age
                
                    
                        Susan
                        Hockey
                        Arts Technologies for Learning Centre University of Alberta
                            Susan.Hockey@ualberta.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        David
                        R.
                        Chesnutt
                        Division of Libraries and Information Services University of South Carolina
                            David.Chesnutt@sc.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Charles
                        B.
                        Lowry
                        University Libraries University of
                                Maryland
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Christine
                        Martire
                        Vice President for Publishing Chadwick-Healey
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Susan Hockey, Chair
                David R. Chesnutt
                Charles B. Lowry
                Christine Martire
                
                    Publication is the life-blood of scholarship. Academic careers are made or
                        broken on the basis of publication. The traditional model in the American
                        universities goes something like this. Scholarly articles are helpful, but
                        the analytical monograph is the key that leads first to promotion and tenure
                        from assistant professor to associate professor. And then a second or third
                        book leads to the rank of full professor. This tradition of academic
                        advancement through publications has served American universities for most
                        of this century, and has in fact hardened in the last two decades as
                        universities found an over-supply of newly-minted Ph.D.s in humanities
                        fields like history and literature.
                    Now, suddenly, the World Wide Web has introduced new forms of
                        publication--electronic journals, on-line book reviews, editions or archives
                        of primary source materials, and even a few monographs--to the degree that
                        the Web acts like a wild card which has been inadvertently shuffled into the
                        deck. Neither our colleagues in the humanities nor our university
                        administrators quite know what to make of all these new forms of
                        publication. In spite of the fact that many such projects are funded by
                        entities like the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Department of
                        Education, or similar government sources -- and in spite of the fact that
                        funding is based on rigorous peer review -- electronic publications are
                        seldom equated with print publications.
                    University presses and other scholarly publishers have heretofore played a
                        key role in the publication of almost every kind of scholarly work in
                        printed form. But the role they will play in the digital age seems very
                        unclear today. Scholarly publishers (university and commercial presses)
                        probably account for most of the books and journals on the shelves of our
                        research libraries. And scholarly publishing is big business--amounting to
                        billions of dollars each year. Given the complexity and the scope of the
                        industry, rapid change toward electronic publication seems unlikely.
                    The Johns Hopkins University Press, a fairly large university press, has
                        begun to face the challenges of the changing nature of publications. It
                        publishes about 250 books and almost 60 journals. And, in Project Muse,
                        Hopkins has one of the most successful electronic journals projects in the
                        United States. Project Muse eschews the "quick and dirty" PDF solution and
                        provides subscribers with full-text versions of 43 journals which the press
                        regularly publishes. Although Project Muse obviously draws support from the
                        general staffs which support marketing, subscriptions, accounting, an other
                        functions within the press, only three staff members handle the conversion
                        of the print editions into electronic editions. Two points are worth noting.
                        First, the press has a well-organized and expert staff dedicated to print
                        publications. Second, the press's major venture into electronic publishing
                        is essentially not much more than a replication of the print versions of the
                        journals.
                    Colin Day--the director of the University of Michigan Press-remarked several
                        years ago that electronic books and journals were going to look much like
                        their printed predecessors. He compared them to the early automobiles which
                        resembled wagons and carriages. In view of what we see on the Web today,
                        Day's prediction seems to be coming true. It may in fact take many years,
                        perhaps several decades, to evolve a new system of academic publication
                        which provides the recognition scholars need for advancement and provides
                        them with an environment which allows them to organize and deliver the
                        fruits of their scholarship in new and creative ways. Although a few
                        scholars are, and will continue to be, contributors to this evolutionary
                        process, most scholars will have to wait for publishers to develop new
                        social and business models which can support creative publications which
                        librarians will welcome into the digital libraries of tomorrow.
                    As to the evolutionary process itself, a number of seedlings are beginning to
                        dot the landscape--giving hope that the evolution will not take quite so
                        long. Three signs are worth pointing to: the current crop of scholarly
                        projects; the development of new graduate programs; and the emerging
                        infrastructure in libraries. Those of you engaged in building content for
                        the Web today are, in fact, pioneers. And as C.M. Sperberg-McQueen is fond
                        of saying, "The pioneers are often the ones you find by the side of the road
                        with arrows in their backs." Be that as it may, you are the risk-takers and
                        you are developing the intellectual models which will influence your
                        colleagues' perceptions of the possible. They will look at your work; they
                        will assimilate your ideas; and they will turn to you for help and guidance.
                        Given the strained resources which many of you work with, this will be a
                        drain on your resources and a burden of some magnitude. But of course, you
                        are not alone. Graduate studies in humanities computing are beginning to
                        gain recognition at universities like Oxford, Kings College, Alberta and
                        others. In addition technology is becoming an increasingly important element
                        in traditional courses where research is being expanded to include Internet
                        resources.
                    Libraries will be another major source of faculty development. One of the
                        more interesting developments today is the emergence of a partnership
                        between humanities computing and library and information science. The common
                        ground joining the two communities is SGML. Librarians are strong supporters
                        of standards and many have adopted the Encoding Archival Description DTD
                        which was developed to provide SGML encoding for finding aids and other
                        access tools in the library and archival communities. While large e-text
                        projects at the Library of Congress and libraries like Michigan and Virginia
                        were early adopters of the Text Encoding Initiative DTD, even more
                        encouraging is the fact that small libraries like those at Vermont and
                        William and Mary are moving toward the same standard--though in those cases,
                        they are using an extension of the TEI DTD developed for historical
                        documents by the Model Editions Partnership. Regardless of the DTDs, the
                        important point is that as libraries build Web resources based on the SGML
                        standard, they will contribute to the development of an SGML infrastructure
                        on their campuses. This in turn will provide faculty members with
                        knowledgeable people who can help them better understand the digital
                        environment for scholarly publishing.
                
            
        
    
