


    
        
            
                The Electronic Lyrical
                    Ballads: A Progress Report
                
                    
                        Bruce
                        Graver
                        Department of English Providence
                                College
                            beg@providence.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    At the 1995 ACH/ALLC conference in Santa Barbara, I announced a new
                        electronic editing project: an electronic Wordsworth edition, co-edited by
                        Ronald Tetreault and myself. Within a month of the announcement, we were
                        contacted by Cambridge University Press; within another year, we had
                        contracted with them to produce an electronic edition of Lyrical Ballads, which we then saw as a pilot project for a
                        full edition of Wordsworth's poetical works. In this paper I will discuss
                        the ways in which we have redefined our project; I will then describe some
                        of the problems we have had in assembling it, focusing especially on the
                        difficulties we have had encoding authorial manuscripts in such a way that
                        they can be conveniently and accurately represented in existing
                        software.
                
                
                    I. From Hypertext to Archive
                    We originally conceived of our edition as a kind of hypertext, modeled after
                        descriptions of similar projects undertaken by Jerome McGann, Stuart Curran,
                        and others. Our aim was to bring together in electronic form not only the
                        texts of the Lyrical Ballads themselves, but all of
                        the relevant manuscripts, much of the source material, all of the
                        contemporary reviews, all authorial comments, and whatever else seemed
                        pertinent to this collection of poems. These materials would be organized
                        with a variety of hypertext links which would, we thought, easily enable the
                        reader to switch from one version of the poem to another, from poem to
                        source, from poem to review, and so forth. But it quickly became evident
                        that such an edition would not be feasible. There were the usual problems
                        with permissions, of course, but the main problem was one of audience and
                        design. Would it make sense, in the early days of the electronic edition, to
                        try to assemble such a massive amount of materials? Would scholars, many of
                        whom are unfamiliar with the electronic environment, be able to negotiate an
                        edition so complex? And, finally, would we ever finish such an edition, so
                        that Cambridge could establish a market for electronic products and continue
                        to support other endeavors like ours? As we worked, our skepticism grew.
                    As it happened, the bibliographical complexity of the Lyrical Ballads came to our rescue. Several different versions
                        of the collection survive. It went through four editions in seven years,
                        each of which is substantially different from the others; there were two
                        distinct printings of the first edition, and first printing of the first
                        edition survives in three distinct versions; the second edition also
                        contains significant printed variants from one copy to the next, in part
                        because of printer's errors and in part because the authors revised their
                        poems while the volumes were in press. And there are also unauthorized
                        printings of the collection, including an American edition and an odd set of
                        London editions made from the discarded sheets of the original printings.
                        Scholars, of course, have known about these differences for some time, but
                        few have ever seen the wide variety of printed variants because the volumes
                        which contain them are very rare and are scattered in libraries and private
                        collections from New Zealand to Grasmere to Colorado. So we decided to
                        attempt to bring together in one place all of these variant printings,
                        supplying full texts of specific copies of Lyrical
                            Ballads, supplemented by photographs of the printed pages in all
                        of their various states. At the same time, we decided to eliminate many of
                        the supporting documents that we had originally intended to include,
                        believing that they would distract and perhaps even confuse readers. In
                        short, we stopped thinking of our work as a hypertext, and began thinking of
                        it as an archive, a virtual library containing digital representations of
                        printed volumes that few had ever seen. This project seemed doable and
                        useful, and would have the added benefit of not burying the Lyrical Ballads under the sheer weight of its associated
                        texts.
                
                
                    II. Representing Revision
                    Because we decided to focus our edition on the printed versions of Lyrical Ballads, we minimized the need for reproducing
                        poetical manuscripts. We thereby avoided the need to get permissions to
                        reproduce copyrighted material, and we also avoided the difficulties
                        inherent in encoding and representing in software extremely messy draft
                        work. But we could not avoid manuscripts altogether. Our edition seeks to
                        preserve the history of the printed artifact, Lyrical
                            Ballads. Part of that history is contained in the printer's
                        manuscripts, the most substantial of which survive in the Beinecke Library
                        at Yale. These printer's manuscripts have been given added importance by the
                        most recent editors of the collection, James Butler and Karen Green, whose
                        edition appeared in 1992 in the Cornell Wordsworth series. Butler and Green
                        chose the printer's manuscripts of Lyrical Ballads
                        (1800) as their copy text; for us to ignore the printer's manuscripts would
                        be to ignore the texts of the poems that most scholars are now reading. So I
                        set to work transcribing and encoding both of the Yale sets of printer's
                        manuscripts: those for 1800 and 1802. The main problem I had to confront was
                        how to encode the manuscripts in such a way that their subtleties could be
                        represented adequately on a computer screen. There was only one model: Peter
                        Robinson's Wife of Bath's Prologue, which I studied
                        very closely. But the differences between a 15th century manuscript, drawn
                        up by a professional scribe long after the author's death, and a printer's
                        manuscript, drawn up by the authors themselves, are enormous, and it soon
                        became clear that Robinson's model would be of little use. Where Robinson
                        had just a handful of revisions to deal with (few of them with any
                        authority), I had thousands, all in the autograph of either the author or
                        his copyist, and I had to find a variety of ways to encode these revisions,
                        in order to distinguish them from each other. For example, Wordsworth's 1802
                        printer's manuscripts were prepared from proof sheets of the 1800 edition,
                        and thus the "manuscript" looks more or less like a printed book which has
                        been marked up by its owner. But there is little consistency in the ways
                        revisions were entered (the sort of consistency that computers, which depend
                        on global commands, clearly understand). Sometimes revisions were written in
                        the margins, sometimes at the foot of the page, sometimes in between lines,
                        and sometimes as overwrites; where the revisions became too extensive to fit
                        on the page, Wordsworth inserted loose sheets of writing paper and entered
                        them there. For the 1800 printer's manuscripts, the complexities are even
                        greater. These manuscripts are a series of letters, prepared in the Lake
                        District by Wordsworth and Coleridge and sent to their printer in Bristol,
                        hundreds of miles away. The letters were sent over a period of several
                        months; the first ones were sent before the authors had determined the final
                        order of the poems, and before several of the poems were even written. The
                        manuscripts were revised as they were prepared, and later letters often
                        include revisions to poems sent weeks earlier. There are also several
                        different autographs in the manuscripts: the base text was prepared by
                        Coleridge or Dorothy Wordsworth, usually, and then revised either by William
                        Wordsworth or Coleridge. Definitive punctuation was added in Bristol by the
                        brilliant young chemist, Humphry Davy, and there are also marginal notations
                        made at the printers, including one that caused the omission of 15 lines of
                        one of the poems. Now all of this is clearly part of the publication
                        process, and it helps to explain the state of the published volumes. And it
                        can be encoded, fairly accurately although not without great pains, with the
                        TEI DTD. But can it be represented clearly in a browser? Can textual
                        scholars, used to the way manuscripts are transcribed in printed volumes,
                        see something vaguely like what they are used to seeing? This is a problem
                        that we yet to solve, and I would like to describe some of the difficulties
                        at the conference, in hopes that someone there will be able to offer
                        suggestions.
                
            
        
    
