


    
        
            
                Wittgenstein's Nachlass, The Bergen Electronic
                    Edition
                
                    
                        Claus
                        Huitfeldt
                        
                            Wittgenstein Archives
                            University of Bergen
                            Claus.Huitfeldt@hit.uib.no
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Bergen Electronic Edition is the first edition of
                    Ludwig Wittgenstein's 20,000 page Nachlass with any claim to completeness. The
                    first CD-ROM volume was published in 1998. The remaining three are due to appear
                    in 1999 and 2000.
                The edition presents transcriptions of Wittgenstein's writings in two formats: an
                    uncluttered, Normalized reading-text and a detailed,
                        Diplomatic study-text. It also includes a Facsimile containing digitized images for every page
                    of text.
                The publication uses FolioViews for presentation and retrieval of the
                    transcription text. InfoVIEW has been used to display the facsimiles.
                In the preparation of the edition, transcriptions are encoded using MECS
                    (Multi-Element Code System). MECS software provides transcription support and
                    ensures that transcriptions can be formatted for output in a variety of formats
                    and styles.
                The Nachlass has been photographed on standard colour film. The photographs are
                    digitized and transferred to Photo-CDs. From the Photo-CDs JPEG-compressed
                    versions of the images are produced.
                The edition is the result of a co-operation between the Wittgenstein Archives and
                    the HIT Centre at the University of Bergen and Oxford University Press. The work
                    is made possible through an understanding with the Wittgenstein Trustees.
                In the software demonstration, we will mainly show the published product. We will
                    also be prepared to demonstrate some of the production tools and methods on
                    request.
                In the poster presentation, we will describe the edition's design and production
                    methods. We will present the various facilities offered end users.
            
        
    
