


    
        
            
                The Electronic Readings Group: Generating Hypertext
                    Dialogue Streams with Folio Views
                
                    
                        Don
                        Lavoie
                        David H. &amp; Charles G. Koch Professor of Economics The Institute of Public Policy
                            George Mason University
                            dlavoie@gmu.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Theodor
                        Holm
                        Nelson
                        Division of Environmental Information Keio
                                University
                            ted@xanadu.net
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Mark
                        Gilbert
                        Dept of Sociology and Anthropology George
                                Mason University
                            mgilbert@gmu.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                This paper explores the pedagogical advantages of a certain sort of graduate
                    course, which will be called an "Electronic Readings Group." It draws from
                    experience at George Mason University in teaching 10 different graduate courses
                    (some offered several times) with a particular software tool, Folio Views. The
                    presentation will offer a demo of the kinds of learning experiences supported by
                    this teaching environment and outline some of the main difficulties and
                    advantages of this mode of teaching.
                In the GMU courses that have been run in this way, the readings are made
                    available (on diskette or CD ROM) and installed in the student's home computer,
                    together with a run-time license version of Folio Views. Students use the
                    hypertext markup features of the software to work "off-line" on their own
                    personal copy of the readings. They annotate, categorize, and make various kinds
                    of links in the reading material, then periodically swap files so they can do
                    the next chunk of reading through the markups of fellow students. In this way a
                    kind of layering occurs where the files accrue a rich set of comments and links
                    so that the participant is no longer only reacting to the original text but now
                    are as much involved in "reacting to the reactions" of other readers.
                The experience of hypertext-based learning can be usefully compared with the
                    classic readings group. The readings group is one of the most successful
                    traditions of humanistic education. A (small) group of serious scholars get
                    together with their own copies of a book and engage in a detailed discussion of
                    its meaning and significance. What makes this classic readings group a richer
                    experience than the typical modern classroom is the intimate relationship
                    between the verbal discussion among the students and the texts being studied.
                    One reason this old-fashioned model has been losing ground to other models is
                    that it is not very scaleable. The hypertext-based course model we have been
                    using at George Mason University can be seen as more similar to the classic
                    readings group than the modern classroom. The electronic readings group may be
                    able to achieve even more intimacy between the participants and the texts being
                    read than can occur in the classic readings group, yet without the scaling
                    limitations. All human dialogue necessarily takes place within specific
                    technological and social contexts. The "richness" that we seek in some kinds of
                    dialogues, especially in the humanities, often requires a context that supports
                    the ability to connect quickly and conveniently to specific formulations in
                    words of the complex ideas under discussion. What makes the classic readings
                    group effective is in part the proximity of the participants to the text under
                    discussion.
                The problem so far has been that those software environments (such as the web)
                    that support wide-area access to a single copy of a shared text, do not yet
                    provide easy-to-use markup tools for the reader. On the other hand those CD ROM
                    based environments (such as Folio Views) that provide the reader with a rich
                    assortment of markup tools do not seem to support the convenient sharing of the
                    markups across a wide area. Our solution at GMU to this dilemma has been to use
                    a feature of Folio Views that is called the "shadowfile" to permit a process for
                    the sharing of text markups. Shadowfiles are the electronic equivalent of a
                    transparency overlay to a paper document. They were developed in Folio with the
                    intention of permitting readers of a networked hypertext to make private,
                    personalized markups which need not be incorporated into the shared network
                    copy. At GMU we have conceived of a completely different way of using
                    shadowfiles, where they are used to create "dialogue streams." The reading
                    materials for the course are distributed at the outset of the semester on CD
                    ROM, typically in one large (say, 15 megabytes) Folio Views file. All course
                    work is done in the much smaller (by the end of the semester about 1 or 2
                    megabytes) shadowfiles, which can be transported around via modem. Working with
                    shadowfiles "on" the master file (of which everyone has an identical, locked
                    copy) allows the underlying texts to remain inviolate, while all sorts of
                    markups are added to what appears to the next downstream reader of the
                    shadowfiles. Each shadowfile snakes its way through the class, accumulating
                    layers of markups along the way. The collection of current shadowfiles is always
                    available at the course web site, so that through the semester an increasingly
                    rich set of alternative "readings" of the original texts are available for
                    consideration.
                In the typical modern classroom the reading and writing assignments are done in a
                    monological way, the student is on his own as he tries to grapple with the
                    readings and tries to compose a piece of writing. The social interactivity that
                    takes place happens separately from both the writing and reading, since it
                    occurs in the physical classroom. But in the classroom those readings are no
                    longer ready-to-hand, so that the texts may be vaguely alluded to, but cannot be
                    specifically linked to. It is difficult to directly tie the class discussion to
                    the readings or to the ideas the student is trying to formulate in the writing
                    assignments. Intimacy with other persons can take place, but not at the same
                    time as, and in a way that is interwoven with, intimacy with the texts. What
                    makes the classic readings group a richer experience than the ordinary classroom
                    is the fact that the texts under discussion are ready-to-hand, are at ones'
                    fingertips. It makes the interpersonal process also an intertextual one. A
                    hypertext-based course can capture and even enhance this textual intimacy. The
                    readings and writings are tightly connected to the interpersonal social
                    interaction process. The class discussion is, so to speak, taking place inside
                    of the books.
            
        
    
