


    
        
            
                The Quest In Classical Literature: Structuralism And
                    Databases
                
                    
                        Paul
                        Barrette
                        Department of Classics McMaster
                                University
                            barretp@mcmaster.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    Univeristy of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    What is a quest? After a close reading of Ovid's Metamorphoses and other Classical texts, I have developed a
                        working definition of the mythological quest: 
                            The quest begins with an initiator who is in need of something or
                                someone import.I shall refer to the "need of something
                                    or someone important" as the object
                                    of quest." This object requires a substantial effort to
                                obtain. The initiator calls or imposes upon someone to undertake the
                                quest, or he may plan to go on the quest himself. A long and
                                substantial journey follows, on which the quester may journey alone
                                or with companions. The quester usually faces some difficulty during
                                the course of the journey either before the destination is reached
                                or after the object is obtained. During this journey the quester may
                                be forced to suspend the quest for various reasons. Upon resolution
                                of these reasons, the quester may continue the quest. Upon arrival
                                at the destination, the quester may seek the possessor and/or the
                                object. The quester may or may not face some sort of test and/or
                                challenge before obtaining the object. Should the quester fail the
                                test and/or challenge, he or she might not obtain the object. The
                                quest is usually complete when the quester returns with or without
                                the object of the quest. Usually the quest is orbital in form, where
                                the quester returns to the point of inception. However, under some
                                circumstances the quest may be considered complete if, before the
                                inception of the quest, the quester has no intention of returning,
                                e.g. when the object is a new homeland.
                        
                    In order to systematically analyze the quest in detail I located a manageable
                        number of quests (35) according to the definition above in both classical
                        and non-classical authors from different genres of literature (e.g. epic,
                        comedy, prose, epitome), from different chronological periods and languages.
                        In addition, I included different versions of several mythological quests so
                        that variant versions of the same quest could be compared more closely.
                    Inspired by Propp'sSee Propp, V. Morphology of
                                the Folktale. Trans. Scott, L. Second ed. Austin: University
                            of Texas Press, 1968. pp. 19-24. structuralist approach to
                        folktale, I decided to use the narrative function as the basic unit of quest
                        structure and to develop a system of functions with which to describe the
                        quest. Since my work is primarily concerned with the quest, and not with
                        larger and more complex myths or tales, I developed a specialized definition
                        of the function, which is based on Propp's:See Propp, pp.
                            19-24.
                        
                            An act of a dramatis persona,See Prince, G. A Dictionary of
                                        Narratology. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,
                                    1987. p. 23. Prince defines this term as follows: in Proppian
                                    terminology, a fundamental ROLE (in a fairy tale) assumable by a
                                    character. or an event, which has a significant impact on
                                the course of action during a quest.
                        
                    With this definition of the function, I developed a set of seventy-two
                        functions specifically for the quest. By allowing for variant and inverted
                        functions, I am able to describe most questsi.e. those that fit
                            my definition above. according to function. I have included an
                        abridged list of functions here, but a full list will be available at the
                        web site mentioned above.
                
                
                    List of Functions
                    
                        
                            A. Inception of quest (3 variants).
                            B. Quester accepts quest (2 variants).
                            c. Quester gathers companion(s) to accompany him/her on the
                                journey (3 variants).
                            D. Departure
                            e. Quester receives help (5 variants).
                            f. Quester's progress is hindered (8 variants).
                            g. Quester suspends quest (10 variants)
                            h. Quester resumes quest (2 variants).
                            i. Quester overcomes hindrance(s) (2 variants).
                            j. Arrival at destination (1 variant).
                            k. Quester encounters the possessorNB the "possessor"
                                    may be a "keeper of the object". There may be more than one
                                    possessor; under such circumstances the reader is advised to
                                    read "possessor(s)". and/or the object of quest (8
                                variants).
                            l. Quester completes difficult task(s) and/or condition(s) are met
                                (2 variants).
                            M. Quester obtains the object of quest (8 variants).
                            n. Quester departs from destination (1 variant).
                            o. Quester returns (1 variant).
                        
                    
                    In order to clarify what a function is, I have included three examples of
                        functions from Aeneas' quest to the underworld in Ovid's Metamorphoses (14. 101-147):
                            1. A clear example: ƒe1, Aeneas asks the Sibyl for help and she
                                helps him.
                            2. A marginal example: ƒh1, Aeneas resumes his quest. We are not
                                told explicitly that Aeneas resumes his quest, but it is clear from
                                the context that he has.
                            3. A difficult to classify example: ƒA3/A1, we are not told
                                explicitly that Aeneas was pondering the quest, but his stop off at
                                Cumae and his actions when he arrives there, i.e. straight away he
                                seeks the Sibyl and begs for permission to visit his father in the
                                underworld, may suggest that he had contemplated this quest of his
                                own accord. But, at Virg. Aen. 5. 731 ff.,
                                we are told that Anchises' shade visits Aeneas and urges him to
                                travel to the underworld to see him.
                        
                    [NB ƒ = function; superscript numbers are variants]
                    Before entering the data into a database, I found it useful to break down the
                        quest into four natural parts which would make it easier to refer to
                        different sectionsSee Propp, p. 92, who speaks of tales in terms
                            of moves. A move
                            is the development of functions which makes up a tale. of the quest:
                            1. Initial sequence
                            2. Journey outward sequence
                            3. Destination sequence
                            4. Journey homeward sequence
                        
                    The sequences themselves do not overlap, but some functions may occur in all
                        of them, while others may only occur in a particular sequence.For example, only the functions A, B, c, e, f, g, h and i may occur in
                            the initial sequence.
                    There are several advantages to organizing quest-functions according to these
                        four sequences. For example, function-data can be easily grouped according
                        to sequence so that queries could be made for all the functions that occur
                        in a particular sequence. By making such queries I was able to establish a
                        set of functions that one could expect to find in a particular sequence.
                        Another advantage is that by organizing my data in this manner it was very
                        easy to enter data into a database. Each of these sequences could become a
                        field in the database, or a table in a relational model. I decided to use a
                        single table database and parse the output of the query on-the-fly to
                        extract and format the data as needed. My database contains the following fields:
                            1. Number, unique integer.
                            2. Title of quest, type text.
                            3. Source of quest, type text.
                            4. Initial sequence, type text.
                            5. Journey outward sequence, type text.
                            6. Destination sequence, type text.
                            7. Journey homeward sequence, type text.
                        
                    The next step was to extract a list of functions for each quest and store
                        this data in a database with the intent that the data would be searched and
                        viewed in a web browser. Since the user interface would be a web browser, I
                        was able to add formatting HTML tags so that different aspects of the
                        quest-functions could be visually distinguished from the others; e.g. I used
                        superscript and subscript tags to designate functions and inverted functions
                        respectively.
                
                
                    Conclusion
                    By developing a set of narrative functions for the quest and analyzing each
                        quest according to function it is possible to separate form from context,
                        with the result that the narrative structure of themes such as the quest can
                        be analyzed regardless of the language of the text. This data can then be
                        added to a database which can be searched. Then, by querying this database,
                        we may not only get swift and accurate access to our data, but we may also
                        ask different questions of a text which could not be easily asked using
                        traditional means.
                
            
        
    
