


    
        
            
                The Hypothetical and Theoretical Underpinnings of
                    Non-traditional Authorship Attribution Studies: Assumptions, Presumptions, and
                    Verifiable Constructs
                
                    
                        Joseph
                        Rudman
                        Department of English Carnegie Mellon
                                University
                            Rudman@cmphys.phys.cmu.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    I Introduction
                    
                        Some words, such as "Phrenology" or "Stylometry", insinuate their own
                            assumptions. In fact, nobody has ever proved that minds can be measured
                            by bumps or style by numbers.
                        Sams [1994] p. 469
                    
                    
                        In our view the protagonists of stylistic analysis in forensic
                            applications have not only failed to demonstrate such a link [between
                            style and authorship] but have not even attempted to do so.
                        Totty et al. [1987] p. 18
                    
                    The hypothesis behind non-traditional authorship attribution studies -- those
                        using the computer, statistics, and stylistics -- is that every author has a
                        verifiably unique style. This paper points out and discusses the fact that
                        this hypothesis has never been empirically tested, let alone proven. The
                        lack of a proven theory after more than thirty years and well over 600
                        studies is one of the main reasons that non-traditional authorship studies
                        are not accepted --in the main-- by either the literary or the scientific
                        community.
                    This paper then goes on to discuss some other assumptions behind the main one
                        and finishes by outlining an empirical study to help move the hypothesis to
                        proof. The movement of this hypothesis through theory to proof is needed to
                        give validity to all authorship attribution studies.
                
                
                    II A Short History of the Hypothesis
                    
                        ...try to balance in your own mind the question whether the latter
                            [text] does not deal in longer words than the former [text]. It has
                            always run in my head that a little expenditure of money would settle
                            questions of authorship this way.... Some of these days spurious
                            writings will be detected by this test. Mind, I told you so.
                        de Morgan [1851] p. 215-216
                    
                    
                        May there not be "fingerprints" in writing, of which the author, and
                            most of his critics, are quite unconscious, but which could be
                            discovered by some new approach, to the benefit of the search for
                            truth?
                        Williams [1970] p. 2
                    
                    This section outlines the history of the hypothesis that every author has a
                        verifiably unique style. Some of the reasons why the hypothesis was never
                        tested are listed with a short discussion (e.g.):
                            1. Computers
                            2. Machine readable text
                            3. Degree of difficulty
                            4. The panoply of peripheral disciplines
                        
                
                
                    III What is Behind the Hypothesis: Other Sub-assumptions
                    
                        Wordprinting is still in its infancy and cannot yet boast an
                            explanatory theory or even an agreed-upon name. Nor do its practitioners
                            agree on an optimal statistical model. This degree of openness...has not
                            prevented the convincing success of a number of important studies, which
                            in turn gives added intuitive plausibility to its basic
                            assumptions.
                        Reynolds [1995] p. 157
                    
                    This section lists and discusses some of the sub-assumptions of the main hypothesis:
                            a. Style is quantifiableThat style is quantifiable is
                                now a given -- a fact already established. This quantifiability is
                                what sets the working definition of style for not only this paper,
                                but for most non-traditional authorship attribution studies. A short
                                explanation with examples of empirical studies that prove this point
                                is provided.
                            b. Style changes over timeThe problems with this
                                assumption are listed and discussed. Key studies on style change
                                over time are explicated.
                            c. Style is different for different genresThe problems
                                with this assumption are listed and discussed. Key studies on style
                                change over genre are explicated.
                            d.Style is as differentiating as (i) Fingerprints, (ii) DNA, or
                                (iii) Iris ScansThese assumptions differ as to the
                                attainable degree of certainty in any findings. This section goes on
                                to discuss what has been reported in the literature about the degree
                                of certainty and what can and should be expected.
                        
                    The general problems of non-traditional authorship attribution as reported by
                        Rudman (Rudman, 1998) are discussed only in so far as they have first level
                        bearing on each sub-assumption (e.g.):
                            a. Which style markers to useIs the number of style
                                markers infinite? Is style an open ended system? (This is a
                                follow-up on a discussion at the Kingstown conference.)
                            b. Which statistical tests to useDo each of these
                                statistical tests need their own theoretical underpinnings? Michael
                                Farringdon's discussion of the criticism that, "QSUM has no
                                theoretical basis," is explicated.
                        
                
                
                    IV An Empirical Proof
                    
                        There are two strategies to making progress toward finding the
                            correct underlying theory, (1) the so-called "top-down" approach where
                            one postulates a complete theory of everything... (2) the empirically
                            based "bottom up" approach where one uses experimental data to make
                            smaller, incremental steps.
                        Rothstein [1998] p. 4
                    
                    This section discusses the "top-down" and "bottom-up" experimental strategies
                        for moving the hypothesis to a correct theory and thence to studies that can
                        prove or disprove the theory. I have not found a "top-down" approach in the
                        literature -- and, understandably so, if for no other reason than
                        logistics.
                    One experimental approach to test the hypothesis, a hybrid of the "top-down"
                        and "bottom-up" is given here and discussed:
                            1. Within a time period (~ +/- 5 years), language (native), and
                                genre, randomly select (n1)% of all possible writers.These
                                constraints eliminate the need to show that a writer's style changes
                                over time, over genre, or language.
                            Randomly select (n2) passages of (n3) running words from each
                                selected author.
                                    The question, "How can we be sure that (n2) is truly
                                        representative," is discussed.
                                    The question, "How do we know (n3) is large enough," is
                                        discussed.
                                
                            Subject each author's text to stylistic analysis.The
                                statement that, "This should be done using as many style markers as
                                possible," is explicated. A short discussion of the statistics
                                behind the adjudication of each style marker is presented.
                            Controls:
                                    a. (n4) other writers from the same pool as (1)
                                    b. (n5) other selections from the writers selected in
                                        (1).
                                The determination of each variable "n*" is
                                discussed.
                        
                    This type of study should be done for every non-traditional authorship
                        attribution study as part of the control. It is important to realize that if
                        this type of control is carried out for every authorship study and if it is
                        consistently shown that every author has a unique style, q.e.d., the
                        hypothesis, is proven!
                    A survey and critique of some important "bottom-up" studies is presented. The
                        importance of attacking both strategies simultaneously is discussed.
                
                
                    V Conclusion
                    One salient point made in the conclusion is that assertation is not
                        demonstration. Another point is that the hypothesis has already made
                        important steps towards theory and proof.
                
            
        
        
            
                Bibliography
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Sophia
                                    De Morgan
                                
                            
                            Memoir of Augustus de Morgan
                            (By his wife Sophia de Morgan, with selections from his
                                letters)
                            
                                London
                                
                                1882
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Farringdon
                                
                            
                            The Critics Answered
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jill
                                    M.
                                    Farringdon
                                 (with contributions by A. Q. Morton, M. G. Farringdon and M.
                                D. Baker)
                            Analysing for Authorship
                            
                                Cardiff
                                University of Wales Press
                                1996
                                239-261
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Noel
                                    B.
                                    Reynolds
                                
                            
                            Statistical Wordprinting
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    Hobbes
                                
                            
                            Three Discourses
                            
                                
                                    Noel
                                    B.
                                    Reynolds
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Arlene
                                    W.
                                    Saxonhouse
                                
                            
                            
                                Chicago
                                University of Chicago Press
                                1995
                                157-162
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ira
                                    Z.
                                    Rothstein
                                
                            
                            The Search for a Theory of Everything
                        
                        
                            Interactions
                            
                                Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon
                                
                                
                                4
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Joseph
                                    Rudman
                                
                            
                            The State of Authorship Attribution Studies: Some
                                Problems and Solutions
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                31
                                
                                351-365
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Eric
                                    Sams
                                
                            
                            Edmund Ironside and Stylometry
                        
                        
                            Notes and Queries
                            
                                
                                
                                469-472
                                Dec. 1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                    R.
                                    N.
                                    Totty
                                 et al
                            Forensic Linguistics: The Determination of Authorship
                                from Habits of Style.
                        
                        
                            Journal of the Forensic Science Society
                            
                                27
                                
                                13-28
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    B.
                                    Williams
                                
                            
                            Style and Vocabulary: Numerical Studies
                            
                                London
                                Charles Griffin &amp; Co., Ltd.
                                1970
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
