


    
        
            
                BNC: the World Edition, and the BNC Sampler
                
                    
                        Lou
                        Burnard
                        Humanities Computing Unit Oxford
                                University
                            lou.burnard@oucs.ox.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                What's the plural of "corpus"? In what social situations is "wicked" a term of
                    approval? Why does it "sound wrong" to say "The good weather set in on Thursday"
                    although "The bad weather set in on Thursday" is perfectly acceptable? If I can
                    say "I live a stone's throw away from here", can I also say "I'm going a stone's
                    throw away from here"?
                Large language corpora can help provide answers for these kinds of questions --
                    if only because they encourage linguists, lexicographers, and all who work with
                    language to ask them. The purpose of a language corpus is to provide language
                    workers with evidence of how language is really used, evidence that can then be
                    used to inform and substantiate individual theories about what words might or
                    should mean. Traditional grammars and dictionaries tell us what a word "ought to
                    mean", but only experience can tell us what a word is used to mean. This is why
                    dictionary publishers, grammar writers, language teachers, and developers of
                    natural language processing software alike have been turning to corpus evidence
                    as a means of extending and organizing that experience.
                The British National Corpus (BNC) is a collection of over 4000 different text
                    samples, of all kinds, both written and spoken, containing in all six and a
                    quarter million sentences, and over 100 million words of current British
                    English. Work on building the corpus began in 1991, and was completed in 1994.
                    In 1997, work on a major revision of the corpus was completed, and in 1998 the
                    British Government agreed to allow distribution of this revised version
                    worldwide.
                The BNC World Edition is now freely available for sale as a set of CD-ROMs
                    containing the full SGML text of the corpus, together with software and indexes
                    needed to search it. It can also be accessed via the BNC Online service provided
                    by the British Library and managed by the OUCS. In addition, and perhaps of most
                    general interest, a special purpose "sampler" is now available, containing two
                    million words selected from the whole corpus, half from spoken and half from
                    written texts.
                In addition to SARA, (the SGML Aware Retrieval Application developed at Oxford to
                    work with the BNC), the Sampler includes the following other state-of-theart
                    corpus analysis software tools:
                        WordSmith, the tool of choice for many corpus linguists: developed at
                            Liverpool University by Mike Scott, and distributed by OUP (Windows 95
                            only);
                        XKwic, tool of choice for corpus linguists in the Unix Environment:
                            developed at the University of Stuttgart by Uli Heid;
                        CUE, a new XML-based corpus utility developed at Birmingham University
                            by Oliver Mason.
                    
                The Sampler also comes complete with detailed documentation in HTML format, some
                    additional data files (notably a selection of treebanked data prepared at
                    Lancaster University, and some sample digitized audio files)
                This presentation will introduce the Sampler and its contents, demonstrating how
                    the tools provided can be used to cater for a variety of needs, whether of
                    language teachers and learners or researchers in general. It will focus on uses
                    made of the SARA system by advanced language learners, and the pedagagogic
                    implications of the learning styles this system encourages.
            
        
    
