


    
        
            
                Electronic Theses and Dissertations at the University
                    of Virginia
                
                    
                        Cristina
                        W.
                        Sharretts
                        Alderman Library University of Virginia
                            cristina@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jackie
                        Shieh
                        Alderman Library University of Virginia
                            shieh@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        James
                        C.
                        French
                        Department of Computer Science University of
                                Virginia
                            french@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Although technology has made life easier in many ways, one of the constant
                    complaints has been the extra time it takes to learn it. What once required a
                    few steps manually, may involve now just as many or more steps electronically.
                    This is why simplicity was the main concern the University of Virginia Library
                    (UVa) kept in mind when developing the Electronic Theses and Dissertations (ETD)
                    project.
                This poster illustrates an elegant method of incorporating a fundamental
                    component of the University's educational experience, namely the publishing of
                    theses and dissertations in electronic format, but with much ease. Electronic
                    Theses and Dissertations are by no means a new concept. The uniqueness of the
                    University of Virginia Electronic Theses and Dissertations is that the whole
                    process was assimilated through the performance of the technical skills and
                    intellectual efforts from faculty and students. The ETD project features a
                    system which creates no extra network load and runs fully automatically from the
                    submission of data to the conversion of data into MARC and subsequent loading
                    into the Library's online catalog, VIRGO.
                The UVa Library began exploring ETDs in 1995 as an alternative means of scholarly
                    publishing activity. An ad hoc committee recommended the use of SGML for
                    archival purposes but this option proved to be more complex than the skills of
                    the personnel available. A new library project team worked with Professor Jim
                    French of the Department of Computer Science (CS), who had led an engineering
                    departmental project in which six undergraduate students submitted their theses
                    electronically. One thesis described the process and developed a prototype for
                    both submission and retrieval of data. The programs, originally developed by
                    Virginia Tech, utilizing Adobe Acrobat Portable
                    Document Format (PDF) to archive the files, were modified to fit the
                    requirements of the University and the Library. The project team then undertook
                    a pilot project in cooperation with the School of Engineering to investigate and
                    evaluate the pedagogical ramifications for new electronic media based on the
                    experiences of the students, faculty, library and, to an extent, the entire
                    university.
                The system was designed to be self-explanatory and easy to use. Submission
                    instructions guide the student-authors step by step. The submission form, a
                    single form for both theses and dissertations, is available at the ETD web page,
                    URL, &lt;&gt;, or through the Library web, URL, &lt;&gt; under Services. At this time only theses and dissertations which can be
                    converted to PDF and HTML formats can be submitted.
                Students begin by entering their name, e-mail address, and degree program and
                    this information triggers the form applicable to the specific degree program.
                    This segment adds title, abstract, year of publication, codes for advisors,
                    committee chairman or committee members, year of publication, number of file(s)
                    and location of file(s) to be submitted. Only 'text' file(s) can be submitted;
                    images are treated separately. The author has a chance to preview the form as
                    many times as necessary and make necessary changes before clicking the Send to Library button. Screen messages, such as error
                    messages, are generated automatically whenever appropriate, while e-mail
                    messages are posted to the respective parties, such as students, advisors,
                    catalogers and school officials, regarding other aspects of the process, such as
                    successful transmissions and availability in the catalog. Internally, the
                    submitted file(s) is placed on temporary storage while the Library cataloging
                    staff is informed of its existence by a separate e-mail. Staff approval or
                    rejection generates an e-mail message to the address included in the submission
                    form. An approval indicates a clean transmission with no missing file(s) or
                    links; a rejection deletes the file(s) from temporary storage permanently. This
                    last feature also helps in preserving the integrity of the database. The
                    approval triggers the creation of a MARC record utilizing the data entered in
                    the submission form. This record is loaded into VIRGO or disposed in the way its
                    author has indicated in the submission form. At the same time the file(s) is
                    automatically moved from temporary to permanent storage and a URL is created to
                    be included in the VIRGO record, making the ETD accessible in full-text.
                The summer of 1998 proved to be a very exciting and gratifying working experience
                    among the committee members which included two students on loan by the
                    Department of Computer Science. The strategies and methodologies will
                    undoubtedly help in pushing forward the ETD project at the University. Planned
                    enhancements are:
                        Complete indexing of the data for searching and retrieval using Dienst for Web interface, in order to
                            synchronize the searching experience in both VIRGO and Web.
                        Securing the authorship of the data.
                        Automate the upload and indexing bibliographic data in VIRGO.
                        Implementing URNs by employing CNRI'sCorporation for
                                National Research Initiatives
                            Handle architecture scheme.
                    
                
            
        
    
