


    
        
            
                Mind the Gap: Reading Literary Hypertext
                
                    
                        Teresa
                        M.
                        Dobson
                        Department of English, University of
                                Alberta
                            tdobson@gpu.srv.ualberta.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Lately we have been bombarded with prophecies about how hypertext is changing the
                    literary scene irrevocably. "The book is dead," futurists proclaim, "long live
                    the docuverse!" Hypertext, they say, makes the postmodern textual ideal a
                    reality, empowers readers, and mimics the associative thought processes of the
                        mind.E.g., George P. Landow, Hypertext 2.0: The
                            Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology
                        (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1997): 2-32. Amid the discourse on
                    reading literary hypertext, however, there are few examinations of the behaviour
                    of actual readers.
                A notable and interesting exception to this reality is Jane Yellowlees Douglas's
                    discussion of how fourteen students in her writing class at New York University
                    responded to Stuart Moulthrop's Storyspace version of
                    Borges's "The Garden of Forking Paths." Douglas describes the bafflement
                    expressed by her students when presented with this text:
                        Confused by a multiplicity of narrative strands in which they could
                            encounter a character dead in one place and very much alive and
                            ambulatory in the next, the readers of "Forking Paths" lacked any
                            tangible sense of a macrostructure which could give significance to the
                            elements they encountered in each individual narrative segment.
                        (par. 33)
                    
                The experience of Douglas's students suggests that readers of literary hypertext,
                    far from being empowered, are at times placed in a Faustian predicament in that
                    their choices are often more limited than they appear. Links are not programmed
                    at random, after all; rather, their presence and their direction are as integral
                    to the artistry of the work as is content. How might we describe the activity of
                    reading in such a controlled textual environment? The words of Mephistopheles to
                    Faustus come to mind: "When thou tookest the book/ To view the scriptures, then
                    I turned the leaves/ And led thine eye" (Doctor
                    FaustusV.ii.89-91).
                By way of approaching an understanding of how readers experience hypertext, and
                    what reading strategies they might employ, this paper describes a two-part study
                    of seventy hypertext readers. Participants read an electronic adaptation of a
                    modernist short story, Elizabeth Bowen's "The Demon Lover." The story was
                    presented to them in one of two electronic forms, both of which were constructed
                    using the HyperWriter! authoring system. Subjects in
                    the control group read the story in a structurally linear format, activating a
                    "next" link to move from paragraph to paragraph. The hypertext group read the
                    same text in what I call simulated self-navigating format.The terms
                        "linear" and "self-navigating" are used here simply as a way of
                        differentiating between the structural formats of the two texts. Some have
                        argued that linear (usually paper) texts are read in a "sequential" fashion
                        while self-navigating texts allow for "non-sequential" reading. This
                        assumption and its shortcomings are discussed in Andrew Dillon, "Myths,
                        Misconceptions, and an Alternative Perspective on Information Usage and the
                        Electronic Medium," Hypertext and Cognition, eds.
                        Jean- François Rouet, et al. (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1996):
                        29-31. As in the linear text, the story was broken down into its
                    paragraph divisions and presented as a series of separate nodes; having read one
                    lexia, however, readers were required to choose between two or three embedded
                    links in order to progress to another. A simulation of multi-sequential text was
                    thereby effected. The "Output Report Action" of HyperWriter! enabled the automated collection of reading times and
                    link choices. Following reading, each participant self-recorded their
                    observations about the experience of reading the text and completed both a
                    demographic survey and a questionnaire about their reading preferences.
                The first phase of the study involved determining patterns in the transcript
                    data. To this end, a taxonomy of reader experience was developed and the
                    transcripts were tagged to enable searches for frequency and co-occurrence of
                    particular concepts. Searches of the transcripts in WordSmith Tools revealed a high level of disorientation amongst
                    simulation readers, many of whom expressed frustration with the unresolved
                    nature of the ending and were puzzled or frustrated by links. Further, several
                    simulation readers reported a feeling of agitation accompanied by a desire
                    progressively to increase their speed of reading.
                To confirm this preliminary indication that the hypertext readers modified their
                    reading in some substantial ways, actual reading speeds and link choices were
                    examined in a second phase of the study. The findings revealed marked
                    differences in reading strategies between the groups. For example, the hypertext
                    readers took nearly eight seconds longer on average per section than the linear
                    readers (linear: M = 35.43 secs; hypertext: M = 43.22), a significant
                    difference, t(23) = 3.823 p &lt; .01. Reader pace, however, changed dramatically in the course
                    of reading: linear readers read progressively faster in the first half of the
                    story (r(9) = -.470, p
                    &lt; .05) but not the second half; this is reversed for hypertext readers, who
                    read noticeably faster towards the end of the story (r(8) = .992, p &lt; .01). Their
                    progressively increased reading speeds in combination with evidence from the
                    transcripts suggests that the attention of simulation readers was diverted to
                    the surface features of the text, and that their reading patterns became
                    increasingly fragmented as they advanced through the story.Findings
                        from this portion of the study are reported in Teresa M. Dobson and David S.
                        Miall. "Orienting the Reader? A Study of Literary Hypertexts." SPIEL (in press). Other analyses will be
                    reported in the paper.
                Although it is impossible to project with assurance from this preliminary study,
                    these findings suggest that hypertext readers do not usually experience feelings
                    of empowerment, control and freedom, nor do they think of themselves as
                    "co-authors" or "collaborators." Instead, they struggle at times to become
                    oriented and are often confused when presented with links. Furthermore, in some
                    instances readers demonstrate agitation and an inability to engage with the
                    narrative, resulting in fragmented understanding. Clearly there is a wide gap
                    between much theoretical discourse and the reality of reader experience as
                    evidenced in this study.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jorge
                                    Luis
                                    Borges
                                
                            
                            The Garden of Forking Paths
                        
                        
                            Ficciones
                            
                                Trans.
                                
                                    Anthony
                                    Kerrigan
                                
                            
                            
                                London
                                John Calder
                                1985
                                81-92
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Elizabeth
                                    Bowen
                                
                            
                            The Demon Lover
                        
                        
                            The Demon Lover and Other Stories
                            
                                London
                                Jonathan Cape
                                1945
                                91-99
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Andrew
                                    Dillon
                                
                            
                            Myths, Misconceptions, and an Alternative Perspective
                                on Information Usage and the Electronic Medium
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jean-François
                                    Rouet
                                , et al 
                            Hypertext and Cognition
                            
                                Mahwah, NJ
                                Lawrence Erlbaum
                                1996
                                29-31
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Teresa
                                    M.
                                    Dobson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    S.
                                    Miall
                                
                            
                            Orienting the Reader? A Study of Literary
                                Hypertexts
                        
                        
                            SPIEL
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                (in press)
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Yellowlees
                                    Douglas
                                
                            
                            Gaps, Maps and Perception: What Hypertext Readers
                                (Don't) Do
                        
                        
                            Perforations
                            
                                2
                                3
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                        Cited from: &lt;&gt; (24 April 1999), par. 33.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    George
                                    P.
                                    Landow
                                
                            
                            Hypertext 2.0: The Convergence of Contemporary Critical
                                Theory and Technology
                            
                                Baltimore
                                John Hopkins UP
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christopher
                                    Marlow
                                
                            
                            Doctor Faustus
                            The Norton Anthology of English Literature
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    H.
                                    Abrams
                                
                            
                            5th ed.
                            
                                New York
                                W. W. Norton &amp; Company
                                1986
                                814-865
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
