


    
        
            
                Eighteenth-Century Cities in an Interdisciplinary
                    Curriculum: Creating a CD-ROM -- Hyperlink Structure and Interpretive
                    Approaches
                
                    
                        Liliane
                        Gallet-Blanchard
                        Department of English Université Paris
                                IV-SORBONNE
                            Liliane.Gallet@wanadoo.fr
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Marie-Madeleine
                        Martinet
                        Department of English Université Paris
                                IV-SORBONNE
                            marie-madeleine.martinet@paris4.sorbonne.fr
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/AlLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    The presentation shows how hypertextual modelling gives multiple contexts to
                        documents in urban studies, representing an interdisciplinary approach. It
                        starts from the example of a hypermedia program on eighteenth-century cities
                        developed with Director authoring software by the Research Centre "Cultures
                        Anglophones et Technologies de l'Information" (CATI) - Université de
                        Paris-Sorbonne.
                    Such a program focuses on the documents' integration in a contextualized
                        setting (Carter). The pathway structure (McAleese) allows the types of
                        hyperlinks to represent distinct approaches to the subject (Deegan).
                        Integrating electronic documents into humanities studies (Seaman) introduces
                        alternative methods, in accordance with the capacity of hypermedia programs
                        to develop sequentially for literary texts or to follow hypertext links in
                        cultural studies (Madsen). This procedure exploits the aesthetics of
                        cyberspace and its own structures, making full use of the meanings which are
                        encoded in the medium (Murray).
                    The range of documents aims to reconstruct the total experience of the urban
                        world. It complements interactive maps with photographs, pictures and
                        animations, and with literary descriptions or audio files -views of music
                        rooms with extracts of works performed there-; it adds interpretive
                        documents, encouraging reflexive interactivity.
                
                
                    Data and structure
                    The program is designed so that the data should always be seen as part of the
                        structure in which they are embedded (Delany and Landow). It places each
                        document in a series of choices between views in different scales (an
                        overview of a topic, or a map of a city, leading to subchapters or to
                        buildings indicated by hot spots, with return buttons to the overall view),
                        and in several contexts--for instance a topographical setting and thematic
                        references, as a multidetermined hub of links (Vauxhall linked to a map, but
                        also part of chapters on gardens, music and literature). The semantic
                        structure can change, recentring the thematic nodes: while the navigation
                        bar remains identical, new sets of buttons appear according to the
                        contexts.
                    
                        a)users can at any moment alternate between the information delivery
                            level and that of organization, accessing the site map with its
                            hierarchy of subject headings, where the title of the section containing
                            the current frame is highlighted; for example they may start from a city
                            then move to its section on religion and from there to a general chapter
                            on religion: switching to the site map at that point will highlight
                            'Topics/Religion' emphasizing that the user has moved from topographical
                            to thematic navigation.
                        b)section and screen: sections are arranged so that a constant element
                            (eg. a map or a view of a building) is retained through several screens
                            while another part of the screen displays additional details in
                            sequence; a button 'return to top screen of section' allows the user to
                            replace a frame in the overall structure.
                        c)screen and document: anchors open on context-sensitive
                            hyperlinks.
                    
                
                
                    Software concepts and interpretive research
                    The conditional links incite the students to make a selection between buttons
                        to move to the next screen, increasing their awareness of the spatial
                        dimensions and temporal structures in literature (Dawson) or in art.
                    Software concepts can be incorporated into issues-based approaches (Bass), so
                        that the variety of interactive effects emphasizes methodological
                        differences in interdisciplinary subjects. Hypermedia integrates the
                        specific software applications developed by several disciplines, imaging
                        their respective methods and goals. Modelling of theories draws attention to
                        methodology (McCarty). Interactivity enriches the interpretation, for
                        instance supplementing architectural morphology with the analysis of society
                        and showing the building in use (Scott), or experiencing the visual axes
                        from many locations of the plan (Thomas). These effects are obtained using
                        the 'perspective' facility in a CAD software, in a simulation of
                        architectural draughtsmanship: having to choose between viewing a building
                        in elevation or in oblique perspective differentiates between these options
                        in architectural drawing (Hiley).
                    The options of hyperlinks on complex documents correspond to distinct
                        interpretive methods, keeping the other options as a background. Some are
                        branching buttons, leading to several types of contextualization, such as
                        that of social and economic life (the museum of eighteenth-century life at
                        'No 1 The Crescent' or Covent Garden as a market), or literary and artistic
                        representations (Fielding's descriptions and Hogarth's paintings). Others
                        start problem-solving sections in activity spaces, for instance integrating
                        the history of mathematical methods into social history: in a simulation of
                        cartographic methods, interactive objects representing surveyors and their
                        instruments can be activated by the user to reconstruct the phases of
                        map-making; the two options underline the differences between surveying,
                        where the user has to move a figure of a surveyor associated with
                        conditional scripts, and using trigonometry, where the user has to enter
                        calculations in an editable field.
                    Mediating documents through electronic presentation emphasizes the
                        interaction of content and method.
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Randall
                                    Bass
                                
                            
                            Integrating Research and Pedagogy through an Electronic
                                Archive Project in an American Studies Curriculum
                        
                        
                            ACH / ALLC Conference 1994
                            
                                
                                
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Bryan
                                    Carter
                                
                            
                            From Imagination to Reality: Using Immersion Technology
                                in a Literary Setting
                        
                        
                            DRH 98
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    John
                                    L.
                                    Dawson
                                
                            
                            A Dimensional Analysis of Narrative and
                                Dialogue
                        
                        
                            ACH / ALLC Conference 1994
                            
                                
                                
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Marilyn
                                    Deegan
                                
                            
                            "Transgressing the Boundaries of Texts
                        
                        
                            Gestion électronique de données et nouvelles
                                technologies en sciences humaines
                            
                                Paris
                                Presses de l'Université de Paris-Sorbonne
                                1995
                                33-42
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Paul
                                    Delany
                                
                            
                            
                                George
                                P.
                                Landow
                            
                            Hypermedia and Literary Studies
                            
                                Cambridge, Mass.
                                MIT
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Mike
                                    Hiley
                                
                            
                            Presenting Heritage on the Web
                        
                        
                            DRH 98
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ray
                                    McAleese
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Catherine
                                    Green
                                
                            
                            Hypertext: State of the Art
                            
                                Oxford
                                Intellect
                                1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Willard
                                    McCarty
                                
                            
                            What is Humanities Computing
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Deborah
                                    L.
                                    Madsen
                                
                            
                            Hypertext and Critical/Cultural Theory
                        
                        
                            Computers and Texts
                            
                                11
                                
                                4-6
                                March 1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Janet
                                    H.
                                    Murray
                                
                            
                            Hamlet on the Holodeck or Towards an Aesthetics of
                                Cyberspace
                        
                        
                            ACH / ALLC Conference 1994
                            
                                
                                
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Sarah
                                    Scott
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Simon
                                    Fitzpatrick
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Ellen
                                    Pawley
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Helen
                                    Pownall
                                
                            
                            Architecture and Society : Interactive Approaches to
                                Architectural Design and Use
                        
                        
                            Craft
                            
                                18
                                
                                7-9
                                Summer 1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    L.
                                    Seaman
                                
                            
                            From Margin to Mainstream
                        
                        
                            ACH / ALLC Conference 1994
                            
                                
                                
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Judith
                                    Thomas
                                
                            
                            Creating Places: The Virtual Tour and the Media
                                Archive
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                    
                
            
        
    
