


    
        
            
                Refining Our Notions of What (Digital) Images Really
                    Are
                
                    
                        Matthew
                        G.
                        Kirschenbaum
                        Department of English Institute for Advanced Technology in the
                            Humanities University of Virginia
                            mgk3k@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Joanna
                        Drucker
                        
                            SUNY Purchase
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jerome
                        J.
                        McGann
                        
                            University of Virginia
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Joseph
                        Viscomi
                        
                            University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Worthy
                        Martin
                        
                            University of Virginia
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Summary
                    This panel brings together authorities from the fields of art history,
                        literary studies, textual editing, and computer science -- all of whom also
                        command significant applied knowledge of printmaking and the graphic arts,
                        or electronic production and editing, or both -- to discuss the aesthetic,
                        ontological, and computational nature of digital images (within the context
                        of much broader traditions of visual representation). Panelists will address
                        both technical issues pertaining to the creation, manipulation, and
                        dissemination of image data, as well as the current state of the
                        critical/theoretical models undergirding our understanding of digital
                        images, and do so with particular reference to the role of images in
                        electronic libraries, editions, and archives.
                
                
                    Full Rationale
                    The panel has two related objectives:
                            1. To advance its audience's thinking about digital images as
                                structured data by reporting on recent technical developments in
                                such areas as file formats and data standards (PNG, JPEG 2000),
                                image editing, image annotation, computer visualization and
                                modeling, and image searching and retrieval based on
                                pattern-recognition technologies;
                            2. To advance the humanities computing community's current
                                understanding of digital images as modes of visual representation,
                                and, in conjunction with the topics listed in item number one above,
                                to scrutinize the prevailing theoretical and philosophical
                                assumptions behind our thinking about digital images.
                        
                    As may be obvious already, the panel is motivated by its participants' shared
                        desire to subject digital images to the same degree of intellectual scrutiny
                        that has been brought to bear in recent discussions of electronic text
                        encoding and text-based editing -- exemplified by the frequently-referenced
                        series of papers by Steve DeRose, Allen Renear, et al. from which we derive
                        the session's title. The panel is predicated on the assumption that the
                        humanities computing community at large does not yet engage with digital
                        images and imaging technologies at anywhere near the same level of
                        sophistication as electronic text, not least because the underlying
                        computational structure of images is so radically different from that of
                        machine-readable text. These computational differences in turn reflect and
                        recapitulate certain elemental differences in the epistemology and ontology
                        of images and text. (Consider markup languages in this regard: markup
                        languages allow one to describe text with more text, but there is no
                        comparable procedure for describing images -- one cannot "markup" an image
                        with another image.) We do not propose to address the manifold
                        epistemological differences between word and image in any comprehensive way,
                        but rather to suggest a variety of computational approaches to image data
                        while discriminating among a range of editorial strategies for incorporating
                        images into digital library collections, electronic editions, and electronic
                        archives.
                    In a recent article Julia Flanders maintains that "[t]he role that images
                        currently play in electronic editions seems to move between decoration,
                        scholarly substantiation, and bravura display" (309). This has been largely
                        true thus far, but new tools and techniques have lately begun to allow us to
                        treat images with far greater subtlety. Moreover, even the seemingly
                        straightforward notion of a digital "facsimile" involves basic editorial
                        decisions which too often go unrecognized: should the digital images be
                        color-corrected, and if so what measure of chromatic fidelity should be
                        employed? Should the facsimile be presented on the screen at its true
                        physical dimensions, a prime consideration in a field such as art history?
                        (The William Blake Archive uses Java technology to resize images on the
                        fly.)
                    But the heart of the issue, as Flanders and others have recognized, is the
                        need to begin treating images as structured data rather than as simple
                        supplements to machine-readable text. Various strategies to accomplish this,
                        ranging from descriptive SGML-based image annotation to search technologies
                        employing sophisticated pattern-matching logics are gradually coming
                        available, and humanists now need to begin thinking through the implications
                        of images as structured data, in the same way that recent years have
                        produced vigorous discussions of text-based electronic editing and
                        text-encoding. The panel will suggest starting points for such a discussion,
                        as well as provide examples of projects that have taken early steps in this
                        direction.
                    The panel will also consider forms of visual knowledge that lie beyond the
                        familiar horizon of facsimile reproduction. As Jerome McGann has recently
                        demonstrated, for example, the algorithms and filters available in common
                        desktop packages such as Adobe Photoshop have the potential to expose formal
                        elements of an image's structural composition through processes of
                        computational deformation. Or else consider modeling and visualization
                        tools, which have a long history of applications in the hard sciences: a
                        visualization of search results or the narrative structure of a text is no
                        less an "image" than a facsimile of a manuscript page, and the increasing
                        ease with which digital tools allow us to generate such visualizations
                        suggests that our thinking about visual materials in electronic editions and
                        digital libraries will soon evolve to encompass this new, non-referential
                        class of images.
                
                
                    Panelists (In Order of Presentation)
                    Johanna Drucker has been printing artists' books
                        using letterpress and offset production techniques since the 1970s. She
                        holds a doctorate from the Berkeley Visual Studies program and has published
                        widely as an art historian and graphic design critic. She has held
                        appointments at Columbia and Yale, and currently directs a visual design
                        program at SUNY Purchase. She will become the Robertson Professor of Media
                        Studies at the University of Virginia in the fall of 1999. Drucker has
                        recently been conducting extensive investigative work on "the ontology of
                        the digital image," which will form the basis for her remarks at this panel.
                        Email: jabbooks@earthlink.net
                    Jerome J. McGann, University Professor at the
                        University of Virginia and a Fellow of the Institute for Advanced Technology
                        in the Humanities, has long been an advocate of "image-based" electronic
                        editing, and his work on the Rossetti Archive has involved extensive
                        investigation of methods for annotating and encoding images as structured
                        data. More recently, McGann has been engaged in a series of "deformative"
                        exercises, using the filters in common image editing software to expose the
                        formal properties of digital images. Email:
                            jjm2f@virginia.edu.
                    Joseph Viscomi is Professor of English at the
                        University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill and a Fellow of the Institute for
                        Advanced Technology in the Humanities. He worked as a curator and graphic
                        artist before reconstructing and reproducing -- accurately for the first
                        time -- Blake's illuminated printing techniques. As an editor of the
                        electronic William Blake Archive, Viscomi's work focuses on color correction
                        and image editing. He will address the twin chimeras of radical subjectivity
                        and false positivism when engaged in image editing, and will also discuss
                        image editing vis-a-vis traditional editorial theory. Email:
                            jsviscom@email.unc.edu.
                    Worthy Martin is Associate Professor of Computer Science at the University of
                        Virginia and Technical Director of the Institute for Advanced Technology in
                        the Humanities. His fields of expertise include machine vision, pattern
                        recognition, and image databases, and he has published widely in these
                        areas. Martin will address the question of digital images from a
                        computational perspective, focusing on how computers "see" and process
                        pictorial content. Email: wnm@virginia.edu.
                    Matthew G. Kirschenbaum (Organizer and Chair), is
                        completing his dissertation in the Department of English at the University
                        of Virginia. He is also the Managing Editor of the William Blake Archive.
                        Kirschenbaum will become Assistant Professor of English at the University of
                        Kentucky in the fall of 1999. In this session, he will briefly assess the
                        current range of software for comparative and analytical operations on
                        structured image data as well as outlining provisional specs for a new
                        image-based software tool entitled LOOKSEE. Email:
                            mgk3k@virginia.edu.
                
                
                    Format
                    The panel is allotted 90 minutes. After a short set of introductory remarks
                        from the panel chair (5 minutes), each member of the panel will be asked to
                        speak for 10-12 minutes, developing one or two specific talking points from
                        their particular background and expertise (total time for five
                        presentations: about 55 minutes). With these initial presentations
                        concluded, panelists will be asked to briefly respond to one another's
                        remarks (clearly time will not permit every member of the panel to respond
                        to every other member, and so the objective here will be to foreground a few
                        major points of agreement and dissent). The remaining 20-25 minutes of time
                        will be given over to open discussion with members of the audience.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            Steve
                                    DeRose et al
                            What is Text Really?
                        
                        
                            Journal of Computing in Higher Education
                            
                                1
                                2
                                3-26
                                1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Julia
                                    Flanders
                            Trusting the Electronic Edition
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                31
                                4
                                301-310
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Matthew
                                    G.Kirschenbaum
                            Documenting Digital Images: Textual Meta-Data at the
                                Blake Archive
                        
                        
                            The Electronic Library
                            
                                16
                                4
                                239-41
                                August 1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Jerome
                                    McGann
                            Imagining What You Don't Know: The Theoretical Goals of
                                the Rossetti Archive
                        
                        
                            General Publications, Institute for Advanced Technology
                                in the Humanities
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            Jerome
                                    McGann
                            The Rossetti Archive and Image-Based Electronic
                                Editing
                        
                        
                            RichardFinneran
                            The Literary Text in the Digital Age
                            
                                Ann Arbor
                                The University of Michigan Press
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Allen
                                    Renear
                            Out of Praxis: Three (Meta)Theories of Text
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Kathryn
                                    Sutherland
                                
                            
                            Electronic Text: Investigations in Method and
                                Theory
                            
                                Oxford
                                Clarendon Press
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Allen
                                    Renear et al
                            Refining Our Notion of What Text Really Is: The Problem
                                of Overlapping Hierarchies
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Nancy
                                    Ide
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Susan
                                    Hockey
                                
                            
                            Research in Humanities Computing
                            
                                Oxford
                                Oxford University Press
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                
                Note: This short list is intended to portray neither
                    the broad range of technical literature on digital images and imaging
                    technologies, nor critical/theoretical work on visual representation, but rather
                    to suggest the panel's positioning in relation to an ongoing and parallel
                    discussion of text-encoding and text-based electronic editing. 
            
        
    
