


    
        
            
                Keeping Our Word: Preserving Information Across the
                    Ages
                
                    
                        Lissa
                        Lord
                         The University of Iowa Libraries
                            lissa-lord@uiowa.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This Web Page is the virtual version of The University of Iowa Libraries' exhibition,
                "Keeping our Word: Preserving Information Across the Ages." Most images included are
                from the exhibition as shown in North Hall of the Main Library on the University of
                Iowa campus from October 1998 to January 1999. The Internet exhibit will remain at
                this location for many years to come.
            The idea to offer a digitized exhibit seemed an appropriate extension of the North
                Hall exhibit topic: Keeping Our Word: Preserving Information Across the Ages. The
                exhibit focus was on communication as a process and preservation as a tool. The
                digitization of the word seemed compatible with the progress of recorded
                communication emphasized in the physical exhibit.
            Mounting an exhibit on the Internet is a technique of display that leads to exciting outcomes:
                    Increased Access: The online exhibit has 24 by 7 visiting hours throughout
                        the year regardless of university scheduling or weather conditions.
                    Education and Outreach: Online exhibits allow for versatility in classroom
                        use of exhibit information.
                    Expanded Resources: The presence of an exhibit on the Internet extends
                        both the space and resources available to the visitor.
                    Images: Online images allow the visitor a close-up view of items displayed
                        in the exhibit.
                    Research: Topics discussed in the physical exhibit can be studied in depth
                        with results reported in the continuing online version.
                    Marketing: Press releases and announcements of the physical exhibit are
                        more engaging with the added discussion of a virtual version of the
                        exhibit.
                    Copyright: Always, the issue of copyright remains an important topic for
                        an educational Web site.
                
        
    
