


    
        
            
                The Personal Meaning Scheme as Principle of Information
                    Ordering: Postmodernism, Transdisciplinarity, and the Ontology of
                    Classification
                
                    
                        Jeremy
                        J.
                        Shapiro
                        Human and Organization Development Program The
                                Fielding Institute
                            jshapiro@fielding.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Shelley
                        K.
                        Hughes
                        Academic Resources The Fielding
                                Institute
                            skhughes@fielding.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    Standard bibliographic classification schemes and scientific taxonomies are
                        useful devices for bringing a certain order -- at least an external and
                        abstract order -- into the mass of available information and knowledge. But
                        they have two limitations: (1) People do not necessarily or automatically
                        organize information and knowledge in accordance with them. Individuals --
                        scholars, researchers, knowledge workers, and human beings in general --
                        seem to organize information, at least in part, in accordance with meaning
                        schemes and cognitive principles of their own individual personalities and
                        lifeworlds, which are shaped by personal (Kelly 1963) and cultural forces
                        (D'Andrade 1995) as well, of course, as by the classification schemes and
                        taxonomies that have become embedded in them. (2) Reality itself is not
                        necessarily or automatically structured in accordance with these schemes.
                        While it is useful, even essential, to learn about them, they are often
                        limited and corrupted by untenable or outmoded ontological and cosmological
                        assumptions. In this world of increasing complexity and perpetual
                        information flooding and, at least in the humanities and social sciences,
                        increasingly decentered and interdisciplinary knowledge, innovation in
                        research often comes from grasping, exploring, and articulating
                        relationships that fall outside of or between the categories of standard
                        schemes and that arise from a combination of interdisciplinary
                        cross-fertilization and personal meaning schemes. Articulating and
                        representing personal meaning schemes and using them to order information
                        can be a valuable method of cognitive organization that can counteract
                        information overload and contribute to intellectual and cultural creativity.
                        And software tools for doing this are now becoming available. 
                
                
                    The Present Context
                    Six features of the present postmodern period create the need for new
                        structures for organizing information:
                            First, the sheer volume of information available through the
                                combination of digital libraries and the World Wide Web means that
                                general classes and descriptors become increasingly less useful in
                                structuring information, because they are less definitive of and
                                make fewer valuable distinctions within the masses of information
                                that they subsume.
                            Second, the progress of the sciences has led to taxonomic
                                complexification, which has rendered obsolete both linear and
                                hierarchical models that underlie current classification systems and
                                led to new modes of cognitive inter-relationship and ordering. As
                                Nicholas Rescher has argued, the new structure, "is not that of a
                                hierarchy at all, but rather that of chain-mail-work interlinkage
                                reminiscent of medieval armor." (Rescher 1979)
                            Third, the increasingly interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary
                                character of research and scholarship, at least in the humanities
                                and social sciences, is motivated by the quest to understand the
                                real, internal relations of interdependence and mediation that exist
                                in concrete objects of research, and these relations are poorly
                                grasped by disjunctive categories that originate in disciplinary and
                                library classes and descriptors.
                            Fourth, postmodern awareness of the limitations of objectivistic
                                and rationalistic frameworks for representing and structuring
                                knowledge has delegitimized the philosophical systems and
                                assumptions that underlie modern information organization and
                                classification schemes. Every scheme for classifying or ordering
                                information is grounded in or implies some ontology or cosmology.
                                The majority of current schemes (e.g. the LC and Dewey Decimal
                                systems) are in effect operationalizations of neo-Platonic, realist
                                ontology and theology, the "Great Chain of Being" (Lovejoy 1936)
                                that asserts the priority of the universal over the particular, of
                                the abstract over the concrete and that see the individual or
                                particular as mere emanations of the abstract and the universal.
                                Despite its own occasionally relativistic limitations, the
                                postmodern critique of legitimating metanarratives and ontologies
                                has removed the ground from both traditional ontology and its
                                idealist, rationalist successors and thereby from the information
                                ordering based on them.
                            Fifth, the emergence of hypertext as a novel and
                                characteristically postmodern method of information ordering has
                                become, through the World Wide Web, a global system for organizing
                                information and knowledge with a simple and viable non-hierarchical
                                infrastructure. Through its use in personal publishing on the Web,
                                hypertext and the mode of cognitive and semantic relationships that
                                it encourages have taken on tremendous cultural and psychological
                                force for individuals, organizations, social groups, and information
                                producers and managers (Landow 1992). And hypertext highlights
                                personal engagement and choice as the basis for information
                                ordering.
                            Sixth, in postmodern, complex, multi-cultural society, any
                                semblance of a universal, background cosmology, cultural system, or
                                generally shared lifeworld that could serve as an accepted common
                                basis for structuring knowledge and information has dissolved,
                                leaving in its place a multiplicity of diverse lifeworlds, cultural
                                orientations, and individual meaning schemes (Habermas 1992). Thus
                                it would be futile to try to invent a new, more encompassing and
                                universal classification system or taxonomy.
                        
                
                
                    Existing classification systems: analysis and critique
                    The library and academic worlds today are dominated by a small number of
                        primary schemes and principles for ordering information (Rowley 1992). Each
                        of these represents a particular ontology or cosmology, i.e. a particular
                        way of organizing or classifying the structure of being or reality. Each
                        scheme has particular philosophical and practical virtues and limitations,
                        that follow primarily from the ontology on which it is based. We consider
                        the contributions and disadvantages of major ordering systems and their
                        ontological or cosmological premises: enumerated classification ("official",
                        classical information orderings, e.g. LC, and semiotic ordering, e.g. Dewey
                        Decimal); faceted classification (Ranganathan and colon classification);
                        historical/chronological ordering (e.g. timelines); cultural symbol systems
                        (e.g. folk taxonomies, the I Ching); hypertext ordering ("point and click
                        your way across the Internet"); hybrid ordering schemes that combine
                        hypertext and classical features (e.g. Internet experts and mavens); and
                        metadata systems (e.g. the Dublin Core). It is our contention that, despite
                        the value of and need for such systems, creative and important research, at
                        least in the humanities and social sciences, often comes from relationships
                        most visible in or highlighted by personal meaning schemes.
                
                
                    Personal meaning schemes
                    For the contemporary knowledge worker, researcher, and citizen, the
                        personally (and culturally) constructed meaning scheme is a useful
                        alternative method for the organization of knowledge and information. By
                        personal meaning scheme we mean a map of the cognitive/symbolic organization
                        of a person's individuated world, which we take to be not only scientific
                        and conceptual but also to include affective, normative, aesthetic, and
                        existential dimensions (Mucchielli 1970). Personal meaning schemes draw on a
                        number of sources, including cultural context, individual psychological
                        development, the canonical information ordering schemes to which the
                        individual has been exposed, the scientific community of which she may be a
                        part, metaphysical systems and traditions, historical context, and
                        technologies (Goody 1977).
                    In the emphatic sense in which we are using the term, a personal meaning
                        scheme, while person-centered, is systematic. That is, isolating it involves
                        a review, analysis, and organization of an individual's entire, structured
                        personal world that, as embodied in a particular social, historical,
                        natural, and informational world, is also "objective" and systematic.
                        However, its objectivity and systematicity are explicitly and awarely rooted
                        in that particular context. The personally and socially constructed nature
                        of the meaning scheme is "worn on its sleeve." As contextual, the personal
                        meaning scheme is dynamic and revisable in accordance with changes in the
                        social, historical, natural, and informational worlds and with the person's
                        changing relation to those worlds. Focusing on the objective and systematic
                        character of the personal meaning scheme also favors intellectual and
                        ethical autonomy and personal self-reflection on the part of the individual.
                        That is, it requires the individual to take cognitive responsibility for her
                        or his organization of her or his world, in relation to other, differing but
                        overlapping contemporaneous personal meaning schemes or worldviews.
                    Psychology, anthropology, and cognitive science provide a rich collection of
                        theories and models for the articulation and representation of personal
                        meaning schemes, from Freudian through existential to personal-construct
                        psychology (Kelly 1963), from structuralist through symbolic to cognitive
                        anthropology (D'Andrade 1995, Lévi-Strauss 1966, Wagner 1986), and from
                        cognitive science's analyses of the structure of mental models and
                        representations (Johnson-Laird 1983). And, because personal meaning schemes
                        are frequently unarticulated or unconscious, psychological and
                        anthropological methods, several of which are particularly focused on
                        unconscious meanings, lend themselves to the identification and formulation
                        of such schemes. Several research methodologies that can be used to elicit
                        and formulate personal meaning schemes and world views: psychological
                        inventories, phenomenological research, ethnography, the sociology of
                        knowledge, and mental modeling.
                
                
                    Software tools for personal meaning schemes
                    There are a number of methods that individuals use in practice to organize
                        information for reasons of personal predilection and utility, ranging from
                        directory and file structure organization to the use of bookmarks and
                        personal Web pages to reflect their personal interests and personal
                        information framework. Software that seems to hold promise for the
                        representation and utilization of personal meaning schemes includes visual
                        mapping and diagramming software (e.g. Inspiration, Visio), which can
                        visually represent the elements and inter-relationships of a mental model;
                        qualitative research software (e.g. Atlas/Ti, NUD*IST), which can visually
                        display relationships among thoughts and concepts; and HTML image-mapping
                        software (e.g. Coffee Cup), which can hyperlink elements of a visually
                        mapped mental model to other information. Probably the most advanced
                        software for the use of a personal meaning scheme to organize information is
                        The Brain, which integrates both visual mapping and information-linking in a
                        single software product.
                
                
                    Conclusion and recommendations
                    From the Dublin Core to the Web search engine, from the digitization and
                        placing on-line of millions of heretofore relatively inaccessible
                        information objects to Amazon.com, which has recently been proposed as a
                        model of the digital library (Coffman 1999), professional and amateur
                        information scientists are devising new methods to make knowledge and
                        information accessible and usable. We believe that the personal meaning
                        scheme, while not viable as the fundamental organizing principle for
                        libraries or large collections of information, is valuable for individuals'
                        information organization and can contribute to the current discourse on the
                        organization of information in the contemporary, postmodern world of
                        information explosion and transdisciplinary intellectual work. There are
                        several avenues of research to be carried out in this area: (1) exploration
                        of the use of relevant theories and empirical research from psychology,
                        cognitive science, and anthropology in developing methods of capturing
                        individuals' personal meaning schemes and cognitive systems; (2) the use of
                        computer tools for the representation and easy manipulation of personal
                        meaning schemes; (3) the practical application of personal meaning schemes
                        to individuals' methods of storing and organizing information; (4) the role
                        of personal meaning schemes in promoting interdisciplinary research and
                        scholarly dialogue.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Steve
                                    Coffman
                                
                            
                            Building Earth's Largest Library: Driving Into the
                                Future
                        
                        
                            Searcher
                            
                                7
                                3
                                
                                March 1999
                            
                        
                         &lt;&gt; 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Roy
                                    D'Andrade
                                
                            
                            The Development of Cognitive Anthropology
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jack
                                    Goody
                                
                            
                            The Domestication of the Savage Mind
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1977
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jürgen
                                    Habermas
                                
                            
                            The Unity of Reason in the Diversity of Its
                                Voices
                        
                        
                            Postmetaphysical Thinking: Philosophical Essays
                            
                                Cambridge
                                MIT Press
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    George
                                    A.
                                    Kelly
                                
                            
                            A Theory of Personality: The Psychology of Personal
                                Constructs
                            
                                New York
                                W. W. Norton &amp; Company
                                1963
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Philip
                                    N.
                                    Johnson-Laird
                                
                            
                            Mental Models : Towards a Cognitive Science of
                                Language, Inference and Consciousness
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Harvard University Press
                                1983
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    George
                                    P.
                                    Landow
                                
                            
                            Hypertext: The Convergence of Contemporary Critical
                                Theory and Technology
                            
                                Baltimore
                                Johns Hopkins University Press
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Claude
                                    Lévi-Strauss
                                
                            
                            The Savage Mind
                            
                                Chicago
                                University of Chicago Press
                                1966
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Arthur
                                    O.
                                    Lovejoy
                                
                            
                            The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an
                                Idea
                            
                                Cambridge, Mass.
                                Harvard University Press
                                1936
                                1964
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Roger
                                    Mucchielli
                                
                            
                            Introduction to Structural Psychology
                            
                                Translated by
                                
                                    Charles
                                    Lam
                                    Markmann
                                
                            
                            
                                New York
                                Funk and Wagnalls
                                1970
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Nicholas
                                    Rescher
                                
                            
                            Cognitive Systematization: a systems-theoretic approach
                                to a coherentist theory of knowledge
                            
                                Totowa
                                Rowman and Littlefield
                                1979
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jennifer
                                    E.
                                    Rowley
                                
                            
                            Organizing Knowledge: An Introduction to Information
                                Retrieval
                            2d ed.
                            
                                Aldershot
                                Gower Publishing
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Roy
                                    Wagner
                                
                            
                            Symbols That Stand For Themselves
                            
                                Chicago
                                University of Chicago Press
                                1986
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
