


    
        
            
                Constructing a Parsed Corpus of Historical
                        PortugueseThis research has been developed with the support of
                        the FAPESP (grants #98/3382-1 and #98/12075-3).
                
                    
                        Helena
                        Britto
                        Inst. Estudos da Linguagem (IEL) Univ.
                                Estadual Campinas (UNICAMP)
                            molina@server.nib.unicamp.br
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Marcelo
                        Finger
                        Inst. Estudos da Linguagem (IEL) Univ.
                                Estadual Campinas (UNICAMP)
                            molina@server.nib.unicamp.br
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Tycho Brahe Parsed Corpus of Historical Portuguese &lt;&gt; consists of an electronically
                    annotated corpus of Portuguese texts whose authors were native speakers of
                    European Portuguese born between 1550 and 1850. Its construction follows the
                    model of the Penn-Helsinki Parsed Corpus of Middle English &lt;&gt;. Only texts from editions
                    revised by the own authors or autographed manuscripts are included on the
                    corpus, each one of them containing at least fifty thousand (50,000) words,
                    presented electronically in three different ways: orthographically transcript,
                    morphologically tagged, and syntactically annotated.
                The Tycho Brahe annotation system is split into three levels: extra-linguistic
                    material codification; morphological tagging; and a syntactic annotated system.
                    The extra-linguistic coding system encapsulates information such as text
                    edition, editor's or researcher's comments, original page number of the texts,
                    etc.
                The tag set that compounds the morphological annotation system was the result of
                    a detailed research about morphosyntactic properties of Portuguese (Britto et
                    al. 1999). In this system, tags have internal structure, and are basically
                    formed from the following components: part-of-speech component, inflectional
                    components, and diacritics. Proposed by Finger (1998), the structuring of tags
                    in a part-of-speech basis and inflectional components allows for the capturing
                    of the morphological richness Portuguese exhibits without increasing the number
                    of tags involved.
                Keeping the number of POS basic tags low has shown to be crucial to decrease the
                    computational complexity of training the automated morphological tagger for
                    Portuguese, which was developed in the lines of Brill's (1995) tagging method. A
                    tagging editor has also been implemented (TAT: Tagging Aid Tool), to help the
                    manual tagging of a set of Portuguese texts (Augusto et al. 1998), necessary for
                    training the tagger. Both the tagger and TAT run under Windows (95/98/NT) with
                    16MB RAM; the tagger also runs under Unix.
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    AUGUSTO
                                 et al 
                            Morphological tagging for different periods of
                                Portuguese prose
                        
                        
                            
                            ms.
                            
                                Campinas, Brasil
                                Unicamp
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    BRILL
                                
                            
                            Transformation-Based Error-Driven Learning and Natural
                                Language Processing: A Case Study in Part of Speech Tagging
                        
                        
                            Computational Linguistics
                            
                                21
                                4
                                543-565
                                1995
                            
                        
                    

                    
                        
                            
                                    H.
                                    BRITTO
                                 et al
                            Morphological Annotation System for Automatic Tagging
                                of Electronic Textual Corpora: from English to Romance
                                Languages
                        
                        
                            Proceeding of the 6th International Symposium of Social
                                Communication
                            
                                Santiago, Cuba
                                
                                1999
                                582-589
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    FINGER
                                
                            
                            Tagging a Morphologically Rich Language
                        
                        
                            Proceeding of the first Workshop on Text, Speech and
                                Dialogue (TSD'98)
                            
                                Brno, Czech Republic
                                
                                1998
                                39-44
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
