


    
        
            
                The Spoken Corpus of the Survey of English Dialects:
                    Language variation and oral history
                
                    
                        Judith
                        Beare
                        
                            Routledge
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Brad
                        Scott
                        
                            Routledge
                            Scott@routledge.co.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Survey of English Dialects: The spoken corpus, recorded in
                        England 1948-1973 is an SGML-based linguistic corpus which includes
                    part of speech tagging, in which the text is linked to its corresponding audio
                    file, and will be delivered within an extended DynaText application. It will be
                    published in the winter of 1999. This paper will describe the context of the
                    creation of such a resource, indicating the benefits and disadvantages of these
                    methodologies for researchers in a number of disciplines compared with existing
                    resources, and will discuss practicalities of the novel mark-up and other
                    technical features that the project engenders. We will also highlight the
                    practical questions that relate to the design and development of such a resource
                    within a commercial publishing environment.
                The Survey of English Dialects was started in 1948 by Harold Orton at the
                    University of Leeds and has been producing unique research data ever since. The
                    initial work comprised a questionnaire-based survey of traditional dialects
                    based on extensive interviews from 318 locations all over rural England. These
                    were published as the Survey of English Dialects: Basic
                        Material (13 vols) in the 1960s, and have formed the core data for a
                    number of other publications since then.Such as Clive Upton et al.
                        (1990) Survey of English Dialects: Dictionary and
                            Grammar, and H. Orton et al. (1978) Linguistic
                            Atlas of England.
                During the course of the survey a number of recordings were made as well as the
                    detailed interviews. These unique recordings are between eight and twenty
                    minutes duration, equalling about 60 hours of dialogue. They are invariably of
                    elderly people talking about life, work and recreation and have not been widely
                    available, but are potentially an important resource, not merely for
                    dialectologists, but for linguists more generally, those studying variation in
                    world Englishes and many historians. The recordings were made from the 1950s
                    through to the 1970s. The early ones are on 78 rpm disks in four minute chunks,
                    and the later ones are on reel-to-reel tapes and may extend to over twenty
                    minutes of free conversation.
                During 1997, Juhani Klemola at the University of Leeds received a grant from the
                    Leverhulme Trust to transcribe the recordings, which work has now been
                    completed. From the mark-up scheme deriving from the transcription process the
                    data has been converted to TEI-conformant SGML, and then part of speech (POS)
                    tagging added by Tony McEnery and colleagues at the University of Lancaster
                    using their CLAWS tagger. The results of this process, given that the target
                    text comprises some very irregular words and grammar, will be reported. In
                    addition, to facilitate the use of the resource, the text and audio will be
                    linked, so that the user can easily hear the audio relating to a given segment
                    of the text. The technical issues in creating this will be discussed.Some existing resources have already combined SGML linguistic data with a
                        linked audio (e.g., the Map Task Corpus developed
                        by Henry S. Thompson and colleagues at the University of Edinburgh).
                        However, as far as we are aware, the SED Spoken
                            Corpus will be the first to extend such functionality in a
                        Windows application using a commercially available SGML browser.
                For the study of the dialects of England, currently available resources tend to
                    focus on unusual words in isolation, rather than dialectal variation in natural
                        speech.Most of the major resources in this area are only
                        available in print form; alternatively, there are of course numerous
                        collections of recordings made for more specific studies, though very little
                        is widely available in electronic form. However, W. Elmer and G. Schiltz at
                        the University of Basel are in the process of creating an impressive
                        electronic version of the SED Basic Material, which includes a facility to
                        search by phonetic string and generate a map of its geographical
                        distribution. However, the development of the application of
                    computing methodologies to linguistic data such as the BNC and ICE-GB has
                    generated a number of corpora which are available for researchers in linguistics
                    and language engineering, and which many specialist researchers now use.
                    Building on these developments, the SED Spoken Corpus
                    has been conceived as a resource that should be accessible to a user group with
                    a wide spectrum of technical literacy, not only in linguistics, but also in
                    history. This necessitates the design of a simple interface and presumes no
                    knowledge of SGML to effectively use the resource, but which also allows and
                    supports research by those in the corpus linguistics community. Any difficulties
                    and compromises which were necessary to achieve this will be outlined.
                A number of features of the development process will be described and discussed.
                    These include:
                        the delivery of a combined text and audio dataset within a (modified)
                            DynaText application;
                        designing a tool that does not necessarily assume great knowledge of
                            using computers in linguistics or history, though which can support
                            those users who want access to all the tagged data and the audio files,
                            whether this be for interrogating the data using the SGML in
                            sophisticated ways, or to load data into other applications (given that
                            one cannot predict every conceivable use to which people may want to put
                            the data);
                        linguistic and organisational issues in implementing the POS
                            tagging;
                        text-audio linking.
                    
                Given the numerous competing requirements in the development of such an
                    application, the paper will also address those factors which may be seen as
                    (necessary) limitations of the functionality of the application.
                The SED Spoken Corpus was never conceived as an oral
                    history project and the recordings were never constructed with such a purpose in
                    mind. Nevertheless, even with the currently limited awareness of the material
                    within the oral history community, these recordings are known as a unique and
                    important collection for which there is strong research interest. This of course
                    raises an additional challenge in the creation of the electronic resource, as
                    the data and the application have to be designed to support the interrogation of
                    rather disparate academic groups. The issues so raised and solutions adopted
                    will be outlined and discussed. Other themes specifically relating to the oral
                    historical dimension of the data will be included, in particular the question of
                    interviewee identity.
            
        
    
