


    
        
            
                Encoding Renditional Information in Primary Source
                    Texts
                
                    
                        Julia
                        Flanders
                        
                            Brown University
                            Women Writers Project
                            Julia_Flanders@brown.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Paul
                        Caton
                        
                            Brown University
                            paul@swansong.stg.brown.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    Renditional information--by which we mean broadly any facts about the
                        appearance, ornamentation, or layout of text on a page--occupies an
                        uncertain position in current theories of humanities text encoding. At the
                        heart of the problem lie longstanding philosophical questions about the
                        nature of 'text'. Does a particular physical instantiation of a work combine
                        an an essential component with non-essential features that can vary without
                        altering the essence? On the surface it would seem that markup schemes where
                        the defined tag set is weighted towards capturing structure rather than
                        appearance (such as the TEI and most other SGML-based schemes) lend support
                        to a practicable distinction between the 'essential text' and its
                        renditional 'packaging' of any one instance (see Renear, Renear et al.,
                        DeRose et al.). On the other hand it might be argued that much of what we
                        commonly consider renditional information--line-spacing, indentation, font
                        family, use of italics, small caps, etc.--serves to impose structure and
                        draw attention to particular types of content. It would follow that to
                        capture the structure of a document together with identifiable content
                        objects like quotes, foreign words, technical terms, and so on, makes it
                        unnecessary to capture the renditional details per se.
                    Many scholarly encoding projects, however, capture primary source data for
                        quasi-archival purposes, and their transcription needs to supply information
                        to people with a variety of critical interests and a corresponding variety
                        of opinions as to what constitutes significant textual information. These
                        projects have to confront the problem of dealing with visual information on
                        its own terms (as opposed to treating it as a cue for structure and
                        content). A clear methodological framework is essential even for a project
                        with ambitions to capture all possible renditional information, let alone
                        one with more modest and realistic goals; without such a framework it is
                        impossible to determine what and how to record. This paper focuses on the
                        problem of defining a rationale for the capture of renditional information:
                        on what grounds do we decide what kinds of rendition to record? and if we
                        want to use meaning as a way of deciding that rendition is important enough
                        to record, what is the horizon of meaningfulness?
                
                
                    Methodological frameworks
                    The possible criteria by which renditional features will be deemed worthy or
                        unworthy of capture emerge from a variety of different sources: some of them
                        pragmatic, some deriving from aesthetic theory or literary criticism. Some
                        of the most significant are listed below, and will be discussed in more
                        detail in the finished paper. These do not represent mutually exclusive
                        categories, but rather overlapping conceptual axes which may interact in
                        various ways: for instance, the criterion of meaningfulness requires one to
                        specify a user population for whom meaning is being defined (linguistic
                        meaning? literary meaning? cultural meaning?).
                    The criteria we will consider are as follows:
                            the criterion of use: what kinds of rendition need to be recorded
                                in order to provide for the needs of an identified user
                                population.
                            the criterion of meaningfulness: whether a given piece of
                                renditional information affects our understanding or interpretation
                                of the text.
                            the criterion of substantiveness, distinguished either from
                                accident or from the decorative: whether information considered
                                decorative or accidental contributes to our understanding of the
                                text.
                            the criterion of measurability or perceptibility and the
                                possibility of accuracy: under this criterion, differences which are
                                too small or difficult to measure can be omitted; this also raises
                                issues of the meaningful units of measurement.
                            the criterion of intentionality, in which case we need to ask
                                whose intention: authorial? printer's house style? compositor's
                                effort to get all the words onto the page?
                        
                    A phenomenon like wrong-font letters might fare very differently depending on
                        the criteria chosen: on the grounds of meaningfulness or substantiveness we
                        might not record it, but on grounds of measurability and serving a certain
                        user population (say, analytical bibliographers) we might well include it,
                        and on the issue of intentionality the inclusion or omission would carry a
                        strong theoretical message.
                
                
                    Creating a taxonomy of rendition
                    Developing a taxonomy of renditional characteristics, however simple, must be
                        done by individual projects based on their own location within the
                        approaches described above. If renditional information is to be used for any
                        kind of processing, retrieval, or comparison, it must be described
                        systematically using terms which identify the significant boundaries between
                        phenomena (for instance, alignment and justification). It is also important
                        (as with any kind of data capture) to decompose complex phenomena into their
                        basic significant parts so that each may be described distinctly.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                    Stephen
                                    DeRose
                                 et al
                            What is Text, Really?
                        
                        
                            Journal of Computing in Higher Education
                            
                                1
                                2
                                
                                Winter 1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            Out of Praxis: Three (Meta)Theories of
                                Textuality
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Kathryn
                                    Sutherland
                                
                            
                            Electronic Text: Investigations in Method and
                                Theory
                            
                                Oxford
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                 et al
                            Refining Our Notion of What Text Really Is: The Problem
                                of Overlapping Hierarchies
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    N.
                                    Ide
                                
                            
                            Research in Humanities Computing
                            
                                Oxford
                                
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
