


    
        
            
                The Role of Graduate Students in Humanities Computing
                    at a Multiversity: The UC Berkeley Humanities and Technology Project
                
                    
                        Diane
                        Harley
                        
                            Center for Studies in Higher Education
                            Berkeley Multimedia Research Center
                            dianeh@uclink4.berkeley.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Research universities or "multiversities" (Kerr, 1994) are under increasing
                    pressure to develop and evaluate models of how best to utilize the new digital
                    communication technologies to enhance their complex institutional missions of
                    research, undergraduate teaching, and service (Trow, 1997). There are many
                    institutional models that promote the importance of centralized support
                    structures (e.g., Bates, 1997, Katz and Associates; 1999, Laurillard, 1995).
                    These models may be particularly useful for institutions that have either
                    identified distance education as their primary mission, or have made strategic
                    decisions to engage regular faculty in distance education activities, or are
                    small in size.
                They may not, however, prove entirely useful for institutions where research is
                    emphasized and more than a few faculty are skeptical of technology's educational
                    potential. In these latter environments, creating strategies that will involve
                    more than a handful of regular faculty in educational technology development and
                    innovation will require discipline-specific and faculty-sanctioned approaches
                    that serve the tightly coupled missions of research, undergraduate teaching, and
                    graduate student training and placement. The latter is especially pressing in
                    the humanities, where there is currently an oversupply of Ph.D's relative to the
                    academic job market, and a perception that the relevance of humanists to the
                    world outside of academe is waning (Weisbuch, 1999). These trends, combined with
                    predictions for a transformation of the academic labor market (Schuster, 1997)
                    and burgeoning opportunities for Mode II knowledge production in the "culture
                    industry" (Gibbons et al., 1994), suggest novel approaches for preparing
                    humanities graduate students for the world beyond the Ph.D.
                This paper will briefly describe the genesis, status, and impact of a model that
                    attempts to address the training and support of humanities graduate students in
                    the creation and dissemination of web-based curricular materials. The U.C.
                    Berkeley's Humanities and Technology (H&amp;T) Project () was a response to the
                    frustration experienced by humanities faculty on the UC Berkeley campus with
                    regard to the absence of a comprehensible institutional, financial, and on-line
                    support structure (Campus Computing Commission Report; 1998; Faculty Internet
                    Survey, 1998). This project's goals are: (1) To support the integration of WWW
                    and Internet applications into humanities teaching and research; (2) Provide
                    graduate student support and training in utilizing these technologies; (3)
                    Provide a one-stop, technologically "smart" venue where graduate students can
                    meet to share knowledge and collaborate in developing new Internet
                    applications.
                From its inception, the H&amp;T Project's primary assumption has been that most
                    humanities faculty themselves have neither the time nor the interest in becoming
                    computer experts--but they do need help in utilizing internet tools for their
                    teaching and research. Our conviction has been that graduate students, provided
                    with sufficient resources, are the best source of faculty support for technology
                    applications. In that spirit, we set out to create a low-cost and
                    administratively simple model that attempts to assemble a core of graduate
                    students with working knowledge of Web technology. These graduate students have
                    the opportunity to directly share that knowledge with those faculty and graduate
                    students who want to develop course home pages and other creative uses of the
                    Internet. One of the strengths of the model is its focus on content, rather than
                    on the technology for its own sake; it is a project born out of pedagogy and
                    scholarship rather than technology.
                We agree with Katz (1999) that technology will only enhance humanities
                    scholarship if scholars familiar with the content are directing the endeavor. We
                    would further suggest that at a research university like UC Berkeley, graduate
                    students, both those who are beginning to explore a field and those who have a
                    firm grasp of their dissertation topics, are an excellent interface between the
                    faculty member and the application. Technical specialists, although essential,
                    cannot understand the scholarly and pedagogical principles that must underlie
                    good materials development. By supporting graduate students in their
                    experimentation, the university can help generate new electronic resources that
                    will enhance the creation, transmission, preservation, and assessment of
                    knowledge. An important corollary of this activity is that the knowledge that is
                    created and preserved can be accessed by those populations, such as high school
                    students and teachers, that have been traditionally underserved by university
                    scholars.
                Centralized support structures are certainly useful for many of the problems
                    research universities face in integrating new communication technologies into
                    academic missions. Additional strategies that are geared specifically to the
                    requirements of humanities computing need to be crafted as well. These
                    strategies should ensure that faculty have easy access to low-level technical
                    support and that serious enthusiasts are provided with resources to develop
                    sophisticated applications. They should also provide a pool of money earmarked
                    for graduate student experimentation with Web-based curricular materials. These
                    latter resources, wisely deployed, can be a cost-effective and productive way to
                    invest both in the creation of digital curricular resources and in the future
                    careers of humanities graduate students.
                Indeed, training and supporting graduate students in creative uses of web
                    technologies can help them compete more effectively in the academic job market
                    in obvious ways. Less obvious, but no less important, is how this training and
                    support can prepare graduate students for employment in a booming culture
                    industry. Gibbons et al. (1994) suggest that the radical influence of new
                    technologies on this industry, and its increasing dependence on visual
                    sensibility and oral skills, is redefining what it means to be literate. By
                    providing graduate students with tools to communicate the importance of the
                    humanities more effectively to the wider world, universities can take up
                    Weisbuch's (1999) challenge and unleash the humanities from the insularity of
                    academe.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    W.
                                    Bates
                                
                            
                            Restructuring the University for Technological
                                Change
                        
                        
                            Conference Lecture, What Kind of University? London,
                                England, 1997
                            
                                
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Gibbons
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Camille
                                    Limoges
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Helga
                                    Nowotny
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Simon
                                    Schwartzman
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Peter
                                    Scott
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Martin
                                    Trow
                                
                            
                            The New Production of Knowledge: The Dynamics of
                                Science and Research in Contemporary Societies
                            
                                London
                                Sage Publications
                                1994
                                90-110
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Diane
                                    Harley
                                
                            
                            Experimenting with Innovations in Humanities Teaching
                                at UC Berkeley: The Humanities and Technology Project
                        
                        
                            The Future of the Humanities in the Digital Age
                                Conference, Bergen Norway; September 25-28, 1998
                            
                                
                                
                                1998
                            
                        
                        Abstract: &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Richard
                                    N.
                                    Katz
                                 and Associates
                            Dancing with the Devil: Information Technology and the
                                New Competition in Higher Education
                            
                                San Francisco
                                Jossey-Bass
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Stanley
                                    N.
                                    Katz
                                
                            
                            A Computer is Not a Typewriter, or Getting Right with
                                Information Technology in the Humanities
                        
                        
                            Lecture in Digital Direction Speakers Series,
                                University of Virginia, February 4, 1999
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Clark
                                    Kerr
                                
                            
                            The Uses of the University
                            
                                Cambridge, Mass.
                                Harvard University Press
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Charlotte
                                    Nolan
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    Duncan
                                
                            
                            Information Technology Needs and Priorities in the
                                Humanities at the University of California
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                University of California, Berkeley
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jack
                                    H.
                                    Schuster
                                
                            
                            Speculating About the Labor Market for Academic
                                Humanists: Once More Into the Breach
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Nerad
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    June
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    S.
                                    Miller
                                
                            
                            Graduate Education in the United States
                            
                                New York
                                Garland Publishing
                                1997
                                92-97
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Report of the Commission on Campus Computing
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                University of California at Berkeley
                                1998
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            Summary of the Results from the Survey of U.C. Berkeley
                                Faculty Regarding Instructional Technology
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                University of California, Berkeley
                                1998
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Martin
                                    Trow
                                
                            
                            The Development of Information Technology in American
                                Higher Education
                        
                        
                            The American Academic Profession
                            Daedalus
                            
                                
                                
                                Fall 1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Robert
                                    Weisbuch
                                
                            
                            Six Proposals to Revive the Humanities
                        
                        
                            Chronicle of Higher Education
                            
                                vol. XLV
                                No. 29
                                
                                March 26, 1999
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
