


    
        
            
                The Jigsaw Puzzle Problem Revisited
                
                    
                        Michael
                        Levison
                        Department of Computing and Information Science Queen's University
                            levison@qucis.queensu.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        James
                        Wu
                        Department of Computer Science McGill
                                University
                            wuj@cs.mcgill.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    More than thirty years ago, the first author was asked about the potential
                        for the use of computers in the reconstruction of ancient manuscripts from
                        fragments. This resulted in two publications (Levison, 1965 and 1967), while
                        independently Ogden (1969) presented a PhD thesis describing the use of a
                        computer to assist in piecing together one of the Chester-Beatty papyri. As
                        far as we have been able to discover, there has been no further published
                        work on this topic. In the case of the most famous collection of fragmented
                        manuscripts, the Dead Sea scrolls, scholars apparently made no use of
                        computers for their reconstruction, though this aspect of their work may
                        have been substantially complete before computers were readily available.
                        Wacholder and Abegg (1991) used a computer in an effort to reconstruct the
                        unpublished Dead Sea scrolls from a concordance, but this is much simpler
                        than the tasks described here, since the concordance already gives the
                        location of each component.
                    The many-hundredfold increase in the speed and capacity of computers over the
                        intervening period caused the authors to revisit this problem, and consider
                        solutions which were infeasible in the 1960's.
                
                
                    Two Problems
                    A fragment consists of a few lines of text, each containing a few characters
                        of some alphabet. The word "few" is purposely vague. It should be noted,
                        however, that if a fragment contains a substantially complete non-trivial
                        word and comes from a known text, a scholar will likely recognize it, either
                        directly or by consulting a concordance. Contrariwise, if a fragment is
                        sufficiently small, containing only a couple of common letters, it might be
                        found almost anywhere in any text, and is essentially useless for
                        reconstruction purposes. We shall return to this topic later.
                    As it happens, there are two different types of reconstruction problem, each
                        involving a different strategy for its solution. Commonly, the text from
                        which the fragments come is already familiar (say, it is a variant
                        manuscript of the book of Isaiah), and can be recognized instantly from some
                        of the larger fragments. In this case, the best strategy for reconstruction
                        is to locate each fragment in an existing copy of the text. This is
                        analogous to solving a jigsaw puzzle by laying each piece in its proper
                        place on a full-size version of the finished picture, without reference to,
                        or comparison with, any other piece of the puzzle. To the extent that we can
                        achieve this, we obtain an approximation to the required result. We call
                        this Jigsaw Problem A.
                    On the other hand, when the text is unfamiliar, we must resort to comparing
                        pairs of fragments to discover juxtapositions in which, say, the right edge
                        of one fragment is a good match for the left edge of another, and reasonable
                        letter sequences are formed across the boundary. This is analogous to
                        solving a jigsaw puzzle whose picture is unknown. We call this Jigsaw
                        Problem B.
                
                
                    A Simple Experiment
                    To investigate the solution of Problem A, a simple experiment was conducted
                        using an electronic version of Lewis Carroll's Alice's
                            Adventures in Wonderland (Duncan Research, 1991). A paragraph
                        chosen at random by one of the authors was reformatted to a different page
                        width and printed in a fixed font. It was then divided into fragments using
                        horizontal and vertical lines (Figure 1). The resulting fragments were
                        entered into the computer in a specified format, and used by the other
                        author for reconstruction.
                    In this edition, Alice contains about 150,000
                        characters, of which the chosen paragraph has 922, divided into 53
                        fragments, averaging 17 to 18 characters each. (The whole text would
                        therefore contain about 8600 fragments of similar size.)
                    A fragment-searching program was written by the second author. Essentially,
                        this attempts to locate the first line of the fragment in the text, followed
                        within a certain range by the second, and so on. Initially this range must
                        be quite broad, since the line width and layout of the fragmented manuscript
                        may not be known. Later, when several fragments have been successfully
                        located, the range is refined.
                    Levison (1965), which was concerned with minimizing computer time to make the
                        process feasible, describes three algorithms for the search. Since timing is
                        no longer an issue for Problem A, the current program used the simplest of
                        these, locating all 53 fragments in the entire text in about 12 seconds,
                        using a Pentium Pro 180 PC.
                    Of the 53 fragments, 51 were sited uniquely in the text, while one was
                        located in more than 120 positions. The remaining fragment gave rise to four
                        sites, but these were, in essence, a single position with four alternative
                        locations for the first line ("he "). These results accord with the analysis
                        in the next section.
                    The algorithm used in the program is linear with the number of fragments (and
                        also with the length of the text.) Thus we might expect to locate a complete
                        set of fragments for Alice in about 30 minutes.
                
                
                    An Analysis
                    Let us look more closely at the results we might expect to obtain from the
                        preceding process, given the size of fragments and the relative frequencies
                        of their letter sequences. We will assume that these frequencies are largely
                        independent of the content, and that particular sequences are scattered
                        randomly through the text. Clearly, this is not true in all cases. For
                        example, the letter sequence "Alice" occurs far more often in Alice than in
                        English texts as whole, while occurrences of "Hatter" are confined to a
                        fairly small section. We are, however, concerned only with orders of
                        magnitude, rather than precise values.
                    Let f(x) denote the frequency per letter for the
                        letter sequence x in the language of the
                        fragments. Approximate values for the frequencies per letter of single
                        letters in English are shown in Figure 2. We see that f("e") is 0.084, implying that 8.4%
                        of letters in a typical English text are "e", or put another way, that 0.084
                        is the probability that a letter chosen at random in an English text will be
                        an "e". Similar tables can be established for letter sequences of lengths 2,
                        3, ... (which we will call digraphs, trigraphs, ...) by tabulating
                        occurrences in a cross-section of texts.
                    
                        Figure 2. Approximate frequencies per letter
                            for single letters in English. (The space character accounts for most of
                            the missing fraction.)
                        
                            a 0.053
                            b 0.011
                            c 0.014
                            d 0.031
                            e 0.084 
                            f 0.014
                            g 0.016
                        
                        
                            h 0.046
                            i 0.047
                            j 0.001
                            k 0.008
                            l 0.030
                            m 0.016
                            n 0.045
                        
                        
                            o 0.055
                            p 0.009
                            q 0.0009
                            r 0.041
                            s 0.042
                            t 0.064
                            u 0.022
                        
                        
                            v 0.006 
                            w 0.016
                            x 0.0009
                            y 0.016
                            z 0.0004
                        
                    
                    Let f1, f2, f3, ... denote the frequencies per
                        letter of the first, second, third, ... lines of a fragment. (If a fragment
                        has a line of length 5, say, and we have frequency tables only up to
                        trigraphs, the least frequent trigraph provides an upper bound and an
                        adequate estimate.) Let V be the width of the
                        range of letters to be scanned for a line other than the first.
                    Then, the probability that the first line starts at a particular letter in
                        the text is f1; and the probability that a later
                        line starts in any of V successive positions is given by: pn = 1 - (1 -
                        fn)V(approximately V.fn if
                            fn is very small). Then P = (f1.p2.p3 ...) estimates the probability that a given
                        fragment arises at a particular site in the text purely by chance.
                    Now suppose the length of the text (in letters) is T. Then if P.T is much less than 1,
                        this fragment is unlikely to occur in the text by chance alone. So, provided
                        that the fragment is actually present, we can expect to find exactly one
                        location -- the correct one. On the other hand, if P.T is much more than 1, then the fragment can be expected to
                        occur many times by chance alone, and the reported locations will be helpful
                        only if most of these can ruled out, perhaps by overlap with uniquely
                        positioned fragments. Values of P.T near to 1
                        can be expected to yield a few locations, and overlap or shape must be used
                        to choose between them.
                    This is exactly what is observed for 52 of the fragments in the experiment;
                        and in fact, the 53rd is positioned uniquely if we ignore its first line.
                        This first line is itself so common that it occurs several times on every
                        line of text1. The extreme situation is illustrated by an
                            English fragment of four lines, each containing only "e". For V = 10,P is about
                            0.017, and for a line of length L = 70,
                                P.L is 1.19. This fragment itself,
                            therefore, can be expected to appear on every
                                line of a typical English text, as a quick glance will
                            verify.. Hence the result.
                
                
                    Problem B
                    Where the text of the fragmented manuscript is unknown, a completely
                        different strategy is necessary. Based on a digitized representation of the
                        shapes of the fragments as well as frequency tables for digraphs, trigraphs,
                        etc. and perhaps a lexicon of the language, we need to develop a scoring
                        algorithm, and apply it to all possible juxtapositions of the fragments, to
                        find the "best" matches. In this way, we seek to build horizontal bands of
                        text (assuming the language involves letters written horizontally across a
                        page) from which the manuscript can be reassembled.
                    Using the previous set of fragments, we experimented with several scoring
                        algorithms. Because of the (oversimplified) method used to create them, the
                        left- and right-edges of these fragments can be represented by columns of
                        integers giving the displacement of each line-end (in character widths) from
                        an arbitrary vertical datum. The differences between corresponding integers
                        allow us to determine which lines fit. This is illustrated in Figure 3.
                    These experiments had limited success. The fits identified as best for a
                        given fragment were rarely the correct ones, though the correct fits were
                        often among the top five. The process in its present form, therefore,
                        reduces human comparison substantially but does not replace it. The reason
                        is easy to discover. Whatever the scoring algorithm, shape inevitably
                        assumes far greater importance than language information, since we cannot
                        even use the latter on lines which do not fit together. This works against
                        vertically displaced correct fits, which are at a disadvantage compared to
                        "square on" incorrect ones. And, of course, the oversimplification of the
                        shape causes far too many apparent shape matches. This problem can be
                        overcome with a more accurate shape representation, but feasibility then
                        becomes an issue.
                    In contrast to Problem A, computing time for Problem B is a significant
                        consideration. For a set of n fragments
                        averaging p lines each, there are roughly 2p.n2, possible juxtapositions2. For a
                            human, the number of comparisons is simply n2, since the eye encompasses and evaluates all the vertical
                            displacements of a pair of fragments at a single glance. A computer must
                            consider each separately.. This amounts to around 25,000 for the
                        53 fragments above, 700 million for the whole of Alice. (To put this into
                        perspective, if the scoring algorithm were to take 100 microseconds, the
                        full comparison would require 200 hours.)
                    The computation can be rearranged. Typically, a human might inspect a
                        fragment to determine the possible characteristics of the one to its right,
                        and then search for a fragment having these features. This does not reduce
                        the number of comparisons to be made, unless these characteristics allow the
                        fragments to be classified or sorted, so that the search can be limited to a
                        fraction of them. Nonetheless, the characteristics of the neighbours of each
                        fragment need be computed only once, and approximate matches might be used
                        to limit the number of neighbours which have to be examined in more detail.
                        We will investigate this in subsequent work.
                
                
                    Summary
                    In summary, Problem A can be solved very efficiently with a computer,
                        provided that the fragments are not so small as to make a solution
                        meaningless. Furthermore, there is an analysis which can be used to
                        determine a priori whether any or all fragments
                        can be sensibly located.
                    A computer solution to Problem B is more difficult, currently reducing rather
                        than eliminating human comparison. A more complex comparison process along
                        with faster (or parallel) processing is likely to alter the balance.
                    Thus, when a 40th century London shepherd strays into a cave, comes upon the
                        archaeological remains of the former British Library, and finds the
                        fragmented manuscript of Alice's Adventures in
                            Wonderland, she should be able to reconstruct it quickly, using
                        her trusty PC Laptop.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Duncan Research
                            
                            Lewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in
                                Wonderland
                            The Millennium Fulcrum Edition 2.7a
                            
                                
                                
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Levison
                                
                            
                            The Siting of Fragments
                        
                        
                            Computer Journal
                            
                                7
                                
                                275-277
                                1965
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Levison
                                
                            
                            The Computer in Literary Studies
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    D.
                                    Booth
                                
                            
                            Machine Translation
                            
                                Amsterdam
                                North-Holland Publishing Company
                                1967
                                173-194
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    A.
                                    Ogden
                                
                            
                            The siting of papyrus fragments: an experimental
                                application of digital computers
                        
                        
                            Ph.D. Thesis 3195
                            
                                University of Glasgow
                                1969
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    B.-Z.
                                    Wacholder
                                
                            
                            
                                M.
                                G.
                                Abegg
                            
                            A Preliminary Edition of the Unpublished Dead Sea
                                Scrolls, etc., Fascicle One
                            
                                Washington
                                Biblical Archaeology Society
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
