


    
        
            
                Patterns of Hypertext and their Impact on Reading
                    Activities
                
                    
                        Karin
                        Wenz
                        English Department University of Kassel
                            wenz@hrz.uni-kassel.de 
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    university of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Following Mark Bernstein's taxonomy of patterns of hypertext I will investigate
                    their specific influence on the user's actions and reader's experiences reading
                    a printed version and a multimedia HTML-hypertext version of the same text. The
                    aim of my investigation is to highlight the reading of hypertext by (1)
                    recording and following the ways of navigation in hypertext by using log files
                    as a primary source to communicative processes and (2) coordinating these
                    results with narrative reports governed by a questionnaire as a secondary
                    reconstructive action.
                The text I've chosen is Carolyn Forché's epic poem "The Angel of History". One
                    group of students has read the printed poem first and the hypertext version
                    second; this setting was repeated with a second group in reversed sequence
                    (reading first the hypertext and second the text). The different strategies can
                    be followed by log files, which record the number of screens visited and the
                    amount of time spent with each screen. These data will provide means for
                    capturing processes of document search, reading, contemplation, and exploring
                    action. However, measuring only the reading time and path does not suffice to
                    interpret the data unambiguously. This is the reason why a second step, the
                    analysis of "reader" reports related to their navigational experience,
                    motivation and intention, has to be added. There will be an additional setting
                    with a group of reader's reading the hypertext version without any multimedia
                    effects and one reading the poem as a digital text in linear version in front of
                    the screen. This extension is necessary to judge, in how far not just the medium
                    used but the mixture of sign systems lead to different results. The storing of
                    navigation paths as a primary resource for the user's action and the narrative
                    reports about the experience with the printed text and the hypertext version
                    leads to protocols about a natural setting of media reception .
                Mark Bernstein developed a taxonomy of patterns of hypertext, which have a
                    specific influence on the user's actions. These patterns are elements hypertext
                    consists of. Their presence or absence influence the reader's choices and offer
                    specific interactive possibilities. This interaction is governed by the rules of
                    the software which the specific hypertext requires. The following patterns are
                    components my hypertext consists of. These are seen in relation to the specific
                    activity they seem to support: (1) The tangle offers a variety of links without
                    specifying information where the link is pointing to. Therefore tangles lead to
                    a disorientation of the reader. The tangle supports the search strategy of
                    browsing through the text. (2) A counterpoint is given by the two voices that
                    alternate in the poem. A third voice is added by using elements (as background
                    color of one voice and text color of the second) to highlight the convergence of
                    both voices, as they seem to merge in the second part of the poem. Another
                    possibility to differentiate between both voices is layers that I used in one
                    and the same lexia to maintain the closeness spatially by dividing the voices at
                    the same time. (3) Neighborhood, and therefore coherence, is created by the use
                    of a specific design (color, visual motifs) for each voice in the poem. This
                    supports the reader's understanding of who is speaking. (4) Mirrorworlds are
                    parallel narratives or intertextual lines, which echoes one theme more in depth.
                    The mirrorworld I added to the poem consists of passages from Walter Benjamin's
                    work and documentary material about the holocaust, which both add new voices to
                    the poem. The mirrorworld offers a possibility of entering and leaving a new
                    space, which leads to an exploring behavior more than it supports close reading.
                    (4) The montage, which opens up several writing spaces at once, is a possibility
                    to highlight a motif or a metaphor used in the text. Montage is used here to
                    focus the user's attention and to develop a special motif in depth. This
                    complexity supports a closer reading of the lexia instead of a browsing
                    activity. (5) The cycle is used to mirror the dialogic cycle and repetition of
                    elements in the printed poem. The cycle leads the reader to a central page,
                    which then will offer new reading possibilities. The cycle fosters browsing
                    strategies as soon as readers recognize that they already have seen these lexias
                    before. The log files will show if the reader's behavior is changing from their
                    first visit of the lexia, which usually means reading and spending more time
                    with each lexia, and the second visit, which lead to a browsing strategy.
                Bernstein's categories concern different aspects of hypertext. Cycle and
                    counterpoint have clearly to do with the shape of the underlying map of nodes
                    and links and can be described as structural or syntactic patterns. But the
                    difference between counterpoint and mirrorworld is more of a thematic or
                    semantic nature: counterpoint means two alternating voices talking about
                    different topics, while mirrorworld means different perspectives on the same
                    world. Montage is mostly a matter of visual presentation and seems compatible
                    with various types of map structure. Therefore I suggest to relate Bernstein's
                    patterns to different levels of hypertext.
                
                    
                        
                            Structural Patterns
                        
                        
                            Thematic Patterns
                        
                        
                            Visual Patterns
                        
                        
                            Expectational Patterns
                        
                    
                    
                        tangle
                        counterpoint
                        feint
                        feint
                    
                    
                        cycle
                        montage
                        montage
                        missing link
                    
                    
                        sieve
                        mirrorworld
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        split/join
                        
                        
                        
                    
                
                Montage and feint are clearly patterns related to two different levels of
                    hypertext. Both mark a transition: montage from the thematic to the visual level
                    and feint from the thematic to the expectational level.
                As the patterns of hypertext the multimedia elements have a significant influence
                    on the reader's activity, if the time spent with a single lexia is regarded. The
                    amount of text offered in a single lexia (from 5 words to 250) has no influence
                    on the time spent with "reading". Pattern recognition seems to be a strategy
                    chosen by most readers. As hypertexts seem to foster a type of reading between
                    improvisation and planning, we need more open models of reading, which a
                    comparison of reading a text, playing a game, and browsing a screen may offer.
                    Both, the hypertextual structure, the sign systems used and the technology
                    chosen, have an important impact on the reading process.
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Espen
                                    Aarseth
                                
                            
                            Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature
                            
                                Baltimore
                                Johns Hopkins
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Peter
                                    Bogh
                                    Andersen
                                
                            
                            The Force Dynamics of Interactive Systems: Toward a
                                Computer Semiotics
                        
                        
                            Semiotica
                            
                                103
                                1-2
                                5-45
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Mark
                                    Bernstein
                                
                            
                            Patterns of Hypertext
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the Ninth ACM Conference on Hypertext
                                and Hypermedia, (Pittsburgh, June 20-24)
                            
                                Pittsburgh
                                ACM Press
                                1998
                                21-29
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Nicholas
                                    Constantine
                                    Burbules
                                
                            
                            Rhetorics of the Web: Hyperreading and Critical
                                Literacy
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ilana
                                    Snyder
                                
                            
                            Page to Screen
                            
                                London
                                Routledge
                                1998
                                102-122
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ernest
                                    W.
                                    B.
                                    Hess-Lüttich
                                
                            
                            Text, Intertext, Hypertext: Zur Texttheorie der
                                Hypertextualität
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jürgen
                                    Söring
                                
                            
                            Androiden: Zur Poetologie der Automaten
                            
                                Frankfurt/Main
                                Lang
                                1997
                                53-83
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    George
                                    P.
                                    Landow
                                
                            
                            Hypertext 2.0
                            
                                Baltimore
                                Johns Hopkins University Press
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Deena
                                    Larsen
                                
                            
                            Workshop: Toward a Hyperliterate World: Expectations of
                                Readers, Writers, and Programmers
                        
                        
                            Siglink Newsletter
                            
                                7
                                1-2
                                21-24
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Lucia
                                    Santaella-Braga
                                
                            
                            Der Computer als semiotisches Medium
                        
                        
                            Medientheorie und die digitalen Medien
                            Intervalle 2
                            
                                
                                Kassel University Press
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Stiftung Lesen
                            
                            Lesen im Umbruch: Forschungsperspektiven im Zeitalter
                                von Multimedia
                            
                                Baden-Baden
                                Nomos
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
