


    
        
            
                TEI in Libraries: Guidelines for Best Practices
                
                    
                        David
                        Seaman
                        Electronic Text Center University of
                                Virginia
                            dms8f@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        LeeEllen
                        Friedland
                        Preservation Directorate Library of
                                Congress
                            lfri@loc.gov
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Chris
                        Powell
                        Humanities Text Initiative University of
                                Michigan
                            sooty@umich.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Chris
                        Ruotolo
                        Electronic Text Center University of
                                Virginia
                            cjr2q@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jackie
                        Shieh
                        Alderman Library University of Virginia
                            ejs7y@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Natalia
                        Smith
                        Wilson Library University of North Carolina at
                                Chapel Hill
                            nsmith@email.unc.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Perry
                        Willett
                        Main Library Indiana University
                            pwillett@indiana.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                David Seaman, Chair
                On June 30-July 1 1998 the Digital Library Federation organized a meeting at the
                    Library of Congress in Washington D.C. on the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) and
                    Extensible Markup Language (XML). Representatives attended from libraries all
                    over North America and Europe. For more information, see: 
                        
                        
                    
                The practical result of this conference is rapid and ongoing work by that part of
                    the library community most involved with TEI; the aim is in short order to
                    provide firm, "library-centric" guidelines in the following areas: 
                        1. encoded full-texts
                        2. metadata (especially MARC/TEI/Dublin Core interchange)
                        3. the use of TEI to manage page-image projects like JSTOR
                    
                Each working group spawned a smaller taskforce to continue the work started in
                    this 2-day meeting.
                The taskforces for two of the three groups - encoded texts and metadata - have
                    already had follow-up meetings and are issuing draft reports; they met again at
                    ALA, in late January 1999, to incorporate comments and finalize the draft Guide
                    to Recommended Practices. The metadata group were able to draw gratefully on the
                    findings that came out of last year's "Putting our Headers Together" TEI meeting
                    at Oxford University (immediately prior to DRH97). The format of this was a
                    useful model for the text encoding group too, who started with a similar meeting
                    to discuss what we already do ("Putting our Bodies Together", we called it). 
                The ACH/ALLC conference in June 1999 is the ideal first venue to publicly unveil
                    and discuss these recommendations. It will give our users a chance to comment,
                    it will allow librarians in attendance to challenge, augment, and adopt our
                    findings, and (as important as any of the above) it will allow us to start a
                    dialogue with major etext publishers to see if they can begin to deliver texts
                    in forms that integrate closely with the data -- and crucially the metadata --
                    that we create in-house.
                The level of commitment to this endeavor has been high, and the ability to
                    present the first version of the Guidelines at the 1999 ACH/ALLC conference
                    (which many of us are attending) provides us with the best, quickest feedback
                    and the opportunity to discuss how we will continue on to a second year of
                    meetings. It is my hope that we can sustain the momentum we currently enjoy to
                    hone the Guidelines and to provide further guidance and tools -- such as the
                    TEI/MARC webform program that is underway at Virginia and the collective guide
                    to TEI tag usage, also in process, that draws on examples of use from a variety
                    of holdings. We believe that our presentation at the ACH/ALLC will be mutually
                    beneficial for us and for the general TEI community, since libraries are a major
                    but often under-represented component in the larger TEI universe.
                The panel will begin with a brief background summary by the Chair, and move
                    swiftly to reports from each of the three Taskforce areas. Of particular
                    importance to elucidate is not only our findings and recommendations, but the
                    lively process we have gone through - are going through - to reach this
                    consensus, and our reasons for rejecting certain alternatives. Given the nature
                    of this set of Guidelines, and our desire for feedback and modification, we
                    expect to allow plentiful time for discussion.
                The Taskforce members are all TEI and metadata practitioners - librarians from
                    institutions with a long investment in online delivery of encoded data and a
                    firm sense of mission about what they do and why.
                This attempt by a major TEI user-community to define for itself common practices
                    in data and metadata creation should hold some useful lessons for other clearly
                    defined TEI communities (textual editors, non-Library university producers,
                    publishers, journal producers) who so far have not articulated a core set of
                    Best Practices, or undergone a critical self-examination of current practices as
                    a way to define recommendations for the future.
            
        
    
