


    
        
            
                Fun with Unix Tools
                
                    
                        Eileen
                        Fitzpatrick
                        
                            Montclair State University
                            fitzpatr@sapir.montclair.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Steve
                        Seegmiller
                        
                            Montclair State University
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Unix operating system provides a set of flexible text processing tools that
                    offer the user features beyond those of standard concordancers including the
                    ability to compare and manipulate different types of text. We show how simple
                    tools can combine to accomplish sophisticated tasks, using examples from
                    lexicography and phonology.
                The creation of an English-Karachay (a Turkic language) dictionary involves
                    checking elicitations from native speakers, grammars, and glossaries against a
                    series of authentic texts for accuracy, citations, and words that do not appear
                    in our sources. Unix tools allow us to find words in context in the manner of
                    traditional concordancers, but they also permit the creation of three lists --
                    words only in the dictionary, words only in the texts, and words in both -- that
                    enable us to decide which words should be omitted from and which words entered
                    into the dictionary.
                Spanish text-to-speech systems are set at a faster rate than English systems. One
                    reason for this might be that Spanish words and phrases are longer than their
                    English counterparts. Unix tools allow us to estimate average syllable length
                    per word by counting vowels in English and Spanish pronouncing dictionaries and
                    showing that, on average, Spanish words have twice as many syllables as English
                    words. Word counts of parallel corpora show that Spanish also has more words per
                    text than English.
                The operations discussed here involve standard commands available on any Unix (or
                    Linux) system, do not require extensive training to use, and are re-usable for
                    widely varying applications.
            
        
    
