


    
        
            
                The Digital Scriptorium: A Visual Union Catalog of
                    Medieval Manuscripts
                
                    
                        Charles
                        B.
                        Faulhaber
                        The Bancroft Library University of
                                California
                            cfaulhab@library.berkeley.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Digital Scriptorium intends to establish the technical and organizational
                    framework for a visual union catalog of medieval manuscripts. It was created by
                    The Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley, and the Rare Book and
                    Manuscript Library of Columbia University. See &lt;&gt; for a detailed
                    description of the project.
                The Digital Scriptorium is designed to solve two primary problems for
                    medievalists: (1) locating the corpus of manuscript materials required for
                    carrying out a given research or pedagogical project; (2) attempting to tie
                    those materials to a concrete time and place. For this there is simply no
                    substitute for visual inspection. Since most manuscripts of cultural interest
                    (literary, legal, scientific, religious, philosophical, etc.) are not dated or
                    localized, they provide little evidence for knowledge of a specific text in a
                    specific place and time, i.e., for precise cultural or literary history.
                Thus a long-felt need of medieval scholars is a repertory of dated and datable
                    manuscripts that can be used to establish a taxonomy by which undated and
                    unlocalized manuscripts can be tied to specific geographical and chronological
                    coordinates. The classical method of paleographical training is to study a
                    series of photographic or printed facsimiles, accompanied by transcriptions, in
                    order to learn the characteristics of the various scripts as well as how to read
                    them. Facsimiles are used because few university libraries have large
                    collections of original manuscripts.
                Heretofore these problems, finding source materials and, once found, examining,
                    dating, and localizing them, have been attacked using paper-based reference
                    tools (e.g., the several Catalogues des manuscrits
                        datés). The computer and the web make possible a better solution to
                    the long-standing scholarly problems adumbrated above; and it was the perception
                    of that solution that lay behind the genesis of the Digital Scriptorium project.
                    As we began to conceptualize a digital database of medieval manuscripts, we
                    identified the following significant criteria:
                        1. Heretofore these problems, finding source materials and, once
                            found, examining, dating, and localizing them, have been attacked using
                            paper-based reference tools (e.g., the several Catalogues des manuscrits
                            datés). The computer and the web make possible a better solution to the
                            long-standing scholarly problems adumbrated above; and it was the
                            perception of that solution that lay behind the genesis of the Digital
                            Scriptorium project. As we began to conceptualize a digital database of
                            medieval manuscripts, we identified the following significant
                            criteria:
                        2. Standards: One of the curses of the electronic age is the lack of
                            standards and the concomitant inability to exchange information
                            transparently among different systems. One of the great achievements of
                            the international library community has been the creation of the MARC
                            format as the standard means of exchanging bibliographic information.
                            With medieval manuscript collections found all over Eastern and Western
                            Europe and in both Americas, the same sort of standardization (of
                            various kinds) is required.
                        3. Extensible and updatable: Given the immense variation in
                            technological sophistication among libraries holding medieval
                            manuscripts, it was evident that any union list would have to be created
                            incrementally, with the more technologically advanced institutions
                            taking the lead and providing the tools so that other institutions could
                            add their own materials when it became technically and economically
                            feasible for them to do so. Similarly, it is necessary to assume that
                            manuscripts described at the beginning of the project might need to have
                            their descriptions updated on the basis of information added later by
                            other institutions.
                        4. Distributed: The logistics of centralizing all of the descriptive
                            information about medieval manuscripts in a single repository are
                            formidable. What is needed is a framework and a set of standards that
                            will make it possible for institutions that hold medieval manuscripts to
                            make information about them available as part of a distributed process,
                            just as information about local holdings of monographs and serials is
                            made known through the various national and international
                            bibliographical utilities.
                        5. Digitized facsimiles: Text descriptions of medieval manuscripts are
                            inadequate, and published catalogs, for cost reasons, can only provided
                            black-and-white facsimiles of a limited number of manuscripts. While
                            there is a good consensus on how a manuscript ought to be described, the
                            descriptions omit features that cannot be described textually yet which
                            are of great importance for comparative purposes. An example: A great
                            deal of effort has gone into the nomenclature of medieval scripts; yet
                            even scripts with exactly the same name are often quite different
                            visually. The user can extract information from an image that would take
                            a cataloguer days to encode or cannot be encoded at all.
                        6. Commercial software: Projects like this one cannot afford the
                            maintenance costs of locally developed software. With the use of
                            industry standard encoding methods (i.e., SGML), the Digital Scriptorium
                            can use commercial software for both encoding and display.
                        7. Revenue: A project like this must generate income in order to make
                            it viable in the long term. Participating institutions should be
                            recompensed for the use of their images in the catalog; while the
                            project ought to generate enough funding so that it can offer seed money
                            to institutions as an inducement to participate.
                    
                Thus our goal is to establish an internationally-accepted framework for the
                    eventual creation of a comprehensive database of medieval manuscripts, in short,
                    a world union catalog, access to which would be available through a fee-based
                    system. In order for this project to be successful it must command the
                    participation of the community of scholars and librarians who use and catalog
                    medieval manuscripts as well the cooperation of libraries holding significant
                    quantities of medieval manuscripts. It must be collaborative in the best sense
                    of the word. This is why we enlisted the support of distinguished scholars and
                    manuscript cataloguers from the U.S. and Europe to design a data model that
                    responds to the needs of medievalists as well as to the exigencies described
                    above. Our modus operandi has been explicitly
                    modeled on the process that led to the successful establishment of the Encoded
                    Archival Description as an international standard for the description of
                    archival collections.
            
        
    
