


    
        
            
                Development and Use of Multimedia Archives and
                    Databases for Humanities Education
                
                    
                        John
                        Paul
                        Ashenfelter
                        Teaching + Technology Initiative University of
                                Virginia
                            jpa5n@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Images, in the form of slides and other media formats, are a staple of many types
                    of humanities courses. The advent of the World Wide Web and other new computer
                    technologies is slowly transforming how these courses can be developed and
                    delivered, particularly at the university level. This poster and demonstration
                    outlines the various types of technologies that can be used to develop
                    multimedia archives for educational purposes as well as a number of specific
                    project examples in anthropology, religious studies, and art history.
                The advantages of using some sort of multimedia archive for a humanities course
                    are those of convenience, access, management. Course development is also changed
                    significantly by using multimedia archives. Images from multiple collections
                    (especially personal ones) are more readily available and accessible
                    conveniently from the instructor's desktop. Keyword searching also greatly
                    improves the ease of finding appropriate material, especially in large
                    collections. The cost of developing a media archive is not insignificant
                    however.
                The University of Virginia Teaching+Technology Initiative, New Media Center,
                    Digital Media Center, and Instructional Technology Group have all been
                    collaborating on these sorts of projects for a number of years. These project
                    span the gamut from history of photography to French culture, to the circus but
                    the basic development process of each is similar.
                The technologies and standards involved in building these projects will be
                    presented, including web database technology, scanning and digitization
                    procedures, image projection techniques, metadata markup, and cross-project
                    integration.
            
        
    
