


    
        
            
                What is text? A debate on the philosophical and
                    epistemological nature of text in the light of humanities computing
                    research
                
                    
                        Susan
                        Hockey
                        Arts Technologies for Learning Centre University of Alberta
                            Susan.Hockey@ualberta.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Allen
                        Renear
                        
                            Brown University
                            allen_renear@brown.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jerome
                        J.
                        McGann
                        Department of English University of
                                Virginia
                            jjm2f@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Susan Hockey, Chair
                
                    
                        The Text Encoding Initiative and other recent markup research projects in
                            humanities computing have fostered lively debate and discussion on the
                            nature of text. If we are to represent text in a form suitable for
                            electronic processing, we need to define what text is and what
                            structures we want to be able to recognize in text. This focus on the
                            structural components of text, pioneered by Allen Renear and his
                            colleagues at Brown University, became the foundation of much of the
                            SGML-based encoding seen in today's electronic text projects. But it
                            also developed at a time when many textual scholars, notably Jerome
                            McGann, began to move away from the linguistic and structural properties
                            of text and to place more emphasis on what McGann calls "bibliographical
                            codes", that is on texts as material phenomena where appearance and
                            rendition are important.
                        This session will take the form of a debate between Renear and McGann,
                            two well-known scholars who have written and spoken extensively on the
                            nature of text. Each will present their views in an opening statement of
                            approximately twenty-five minutes. They will then be given a further
                            five minutes to reply before the topic is open to the floor for further
                            discussion and questions.
                    
                    
                        
                            1. Position statement from Renear
                            Allen Renear
                            
                                I will present and defend a particular view of textuality. It is
                                    a view which has roots in common sense and tradition, and which
                                    has also proven to be heuristic in directing research and
                                    practical for guiding system and software designers. It is a
                                    view that seems to illuminate textual practices in the
                                    humanities and it is arguably implicit in work of the Text
                                    Encoding Initiative. However it is, at least in parts, coming
                                    increasingly under suspicion. This is too bad, as this view is
                                    not only a rather good account of textuality, it is the best
                                    account we have.
                                I will advocate this theory by defending five theses; I will
                                    argue that texts are: 
                                        1. real: they have properties independent of our
                                            interests in them and our theories about them.
                                        2. abstract: the objects which constitute texts are
                                            abstract, not material, objects.
                                        3. intentional: texts are, necessarily, the product of
                                            mental acts.
                                        4. hierarchical: the structure of texts is
                                            fundamentally hierarchical.
                                        5. linguistic: texts are linguistic objects;
                                            renditional features are not parts of texts, and
                                            therefore not proper locations for textual meaning.
                                        
                                    
                                
                                I will rehearse the arguments, which I believe to be decisive,
                                    and consider alleged counterexamples, which I believe fail. I do
                                    not claim that this view encounters no hard cases, or that it
                                    solves all problems. But in the course of the discussion we will
                                    see that this account of text is rich in explanatory and
                                    predictive power, implied by our modal intuitions about cultural
                                    artifacts, and useful both in regulating further inquiry, and in
                                    guiding the development of tools and resources. Finally, and
                                    very importantly, I argue that this view has no serious
                                    competitors. It is the best account of text that we have, and,
                                    fortunately, it is a good one.
                                This theory of text has been developed in collaboration, over the
                                    last ten years, with colleagues at Brown and elsewhere --
                                    however most of those involved would demur from the ambitions,
                                    and commitments, of my formulations here. The development of
                                    this view can be found in the following papers.
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            James
                                                  H.Coombs
                                            Allen
                                                  Renear
                                            Steven
                                                  J.
                                                  DeRose
                                            Markup Systems and The Future of
                                                Scholarly Text Processing
                                        
                                        
                                            Communications of the Association for
                                                Computing Machinery
                                            
                                                30
                                                11
                                                
                                                1987
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Steven
                                                  DeRose
                                            David
                                                  Durand
                                            Elli
                                                  Mylonas
                                            What is Text, Really?
                                        
                                        
                                            Journal of Computing in Higher
                                                Education
                                            
                                                1
                                                2
                                                
                                                1990
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Allen
                                                  Renear
                                            Elli
                                                  Mylonas
                                            David
                                                  Durand
                                            Refining Our Notion of What Text Really
                                                Is: The Problem of Overlapping Hierarchies
                                        
                                        
                                            Research in Humanities
                                                Computing
                                            
                                                
                                                Oxford University Press
                                                1996
                                            
                                        
                                        (Version presented at ALLC/ACH92 at Christ Church,
                                            Oxford; 1992: ). 
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Allen
                                                  Renear
                                            Practical Ontology: The Case of Written
                                                Communication
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                
                                                  Kjell
                                                  S.
                                                  Johannessen
                                                
                                            
                                            
                                                
                                                  Tore
                                                  Nordenstam
                                                
                                            
                                            Culture and Value: Philosophy and the
                                                Cultural Sciences, Kirchberg am Wechsel 1995
                                            
                                                
                                                
                                                1995
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Allen
                                                  Renear
                                            Theory and Meta-Theory in the
                                                Development of Text Encoding
                                        
                                        
                                            Target paper for the The Monist, currently (1996) in
                                                circulation in the Interactive Monist
                                                Seminar.Summary published in
                                            The Monist
                                            
                                                80
                                                3
                                                
                                                July 1997
                                            
                                        
                                        See: .
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Steven
                                                  J.DeRose
                                            David
                                                  Durand
                                            Elli
                                                  Mylonas
                                            Allen
                                                  Renear
                                            Author's Response to Three Comments on
                                                'What is Text, Really?
                                        
                                        
                                            Journal of Computer
                                                Documentation
                                            
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                1997
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            Allen
                                                  Renear
                                            Out of Praxis: Three (Meta)Theories of
                                                Textuality
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                
                                                  Kathryn
                                                  Sutherland
                                                
                                            
                                            Electronic Textuality: Investigations
                                                in Method and Theory
                                            
                                                
                                                Oxford University Press
                                                1997
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                Although criticisms of this view from within the humanities
                                    computing community have been expressed in conference papers by
                                    Claus Huitfeldt, Dino Buzzetti, Fabio Ciotti, and others (see:
                                        ),
                                    it is widely thought that very serious problems for this theory
                                    can also be found in the influential work of the theorist of
                                    textual criticism, Jerome McGann.
                            
                        
                        
                            
                                2. Position statement from McGann
                                Jerome J. McGann
                                
                                    The question framing this ACH session involves a
                                        misconception. It assumes that "text" is a unitary
                                        phenomenon and that its concept can be thought as
                                        self-identical. But while both of these assumptions may be
                                        undertaken for heuristic purposes, neither represents what
                                        Wittgenstein called "the case".
                                    In the field of Humanities Computing the idea of text has
                                        been dominated by conceptions practically realized in the
                                        TEI implementation of SGML markup. Several key theoretical
                                        papers published by Steve DeRose, Allen Renear, "et al."
                                        explain the ground of that implementation.
                                    This ground, explicitly "abstract" (Renear1997), represents a
                                        view of text as essentially a vehicle for transmitting
                                        information and concepts (final cause). Text is
                                        "hierarchical" (formal cause) and "linguistic" (material
                                        cause), and it is a product of human intention (efficient
                                        cause).
                                    I invoke these Aristotelian categories because Renear
                                        correctly insists upon the "platonic" character of the
                                        TEI/SGML approach to textuality. That self-description,
                                        traceable to several Platonic works, the Republic in
                                        particular, helps to clarify the differential involved in
                                        "poetic" or noninformational forms of textuality. There is
                                        no question but that most of our textual archive is
                                        hierarchically organized. On the other hand, there is also
                                        no question but that poetical texts comprise a key, perhaps
                                        even a defining, part of the corpus of our humanities
                                        archive. When Plato called for the expulsion of the poets
                                        from the city, he was arguing for a certain theory of
                                        textuality.
                                    Unlike expository text, poetry is not organized in a
                                        determinate hierarchy. TEI and SGML markup, therefore, while
                                        reasonably adequate vehicles for expository and
                                        informational texts, fails to render those features of
                                        poetic text that are most salient for its makers and users.
                                        Poetical texts are recursive structures built out of complex
                                        networks of repetition and variation. No poem can exist
                                        without systems of "overlapping structures", and the more
                                        developed the poetical text, the more complex are those
                                        systems of recursion. So it is that in a poetic field no
                                        unit can be assumed to be self-identical. The logic of the
                                        poem is only frameable in some kind of paradoxical
                                        articulation such as: "a equals a if and only if a does not
                                        equal a".
                                    This essential character of poetical text helps to explain
                                        why content in poeisis tends to involve more broadly
                                        "semiotic" rather than narrowly "linguistic" materials. The
                                        sonic and visible features of text are, so far as the poets
                                        who make these texts are concerned (or the readers who
                                        engage them), nearly as apt for expressive poetical purposes
                                        as the semantic, syntactic, and rhetorical features. Each of
                                        these features represents a field of textual action, and
                                        while any one field may be individually (abstractly) framed
                                        in a hierarchized scheme, the recursive interplay of the
                                        fields produces works whose order is not hierarchical. Of
                                        course a governing hierarchy can be imposed upon such works.
                                        TEI and SGML create, as Renear shows, a certain type of
                                        "linguistic" hierarchy, one that privileges text as a
                                        container for storing information. But even that linguistic
                                        hierarchy is highly specialized (it does not consider, for
                                        example, the rhetorical structures that overlap and infect
                                        the syntax and semantics).
                                    The case of poetry in fact defines a kind of textual ethos,
                                        as it were, that may be seen to pervade genres not normally
                                        thought of as poetical. Certain kinds of philosophers lend
                                        themselves to a hierarchical approach - St. Thomas, Kant,
                                        Hegel. Others don't. Not without reason has the Bergen
                                        Wittgenstein project abandoned TEI/SGML as a system for
                                        marking up the corpus of Wittgenstein's texts; and the
                                        scholars setting out now to "edit" the Peirce archive are
                                        well aware that TEI/SGML does not lend itself to an adequate
                                        treatment of Peirce's work, and least of all to his
                                        existential graphs. "Text" in Kant "is" one thing, but in
                                        Peirce it "is" something else again.
                                
                                
                                    Reference
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                Allen
                                                  Renear
                                                Out of Praxis: Three (Meta)Theories
                                                  of Textuality
                                            
                                            
                                                
                                                  
                                                  Kathryn
                                                  Sutherland
                                                  
                                                
                                                Electronic Text: Investigations in
                                                  Theory and Method
                                                
                                                  Oxford
                                                  Clarendon Press
                                                  1997
                                                  107-26
                                                
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
