


    
        
            
                Interdisciplinary Humanities Scholars and Hybrid
                    Information Environments
                
                    
                        Carole
                        L.
                        Palmer
                        Library and Information Science University of
                                Illinois
                            palmer@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Laura
                        J.
                        Neumann
                        Library and Information Science University of
                                Illinois
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                1999
                
                    University of Virginia
                
                Charlottesville, VA
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 1999
                
                    editor
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    This paper reports on a study of how interdisciplinary humanities scholars
                        find and use information. It is part of a series of studies we have
                        conducted over the past five years addressing information use in fields
                        ranging from literary studies to artificial intelligence[7], [9], [10]. As
                        information scientists we are interested in how information is gathered,
                        used, synthesized, disseminated, and the impact of technology on these
                        processes. While some of our recent work has been directed at the use of
                        digital materials, our overall program of research is designed to build a
                        holistic understanding of the interplay between various types and formats of
                        information in scholarly work. Hence, our interest in understanding the many
                        facets of scholarship and research that predate digital systems as well as
                        how scholars make the transition to new formats and the functions they
                        provide.
                    Information science has produced a large body of literature on information
                        use, most of which has concentrated on scientific information and
                        communication. However, the results of science user studies can have limited
                        applicability to other fields that differ in their modes of inquiry. While
                        we have found that certain information practices hold constant for
                        interdisciplinary research across the sciences and humanities, we have also
                        identified critical variations. Moreover, many of the current science-based
                        initiatives may not be cogent for research traditions that rely on
                        contextual richness. For instance, important aspects of document modularity,
                        terminology exchange, and collaborative information spaces will differ in
                        the humanities, presenting unique problems and priorities. Recently in our
                        field, investigators have begun to stress the social, ecological, and
                        content-oriented nature of information and knowledge, focusing on the
                        differing cultures, communication patterns, and vocabularies of
                        literature-producing subject fields [3], [8], [15]. Our approach follows
                        this trend and is grounded in studies of knowledge creation and work
                        practices that focus on the role of information in relation to material
                        resources, work practices and environments, and intellectual communities
                        [12], [13].
                    We are concentrating on humanities scholars in this phase of our research
                        because we believe that their work reflects fundamental processes that
                        should be supported in existing and future libraries. In particular, we are
                        concerned with the ability to sustain humanists' reliance on a range of
                        primary and secondary materials, in both physical and digital formats [6],
                        as well as their deep engagement with texts, artifacts, and other forms of
                        information. These features may ultimately distinguish working research
                        libraries from storehouses of physical and digitized materials. By targeting
                        a subset of interdisciplinary humanists, this study foregrounds the
                        complications of accessing, managing, and integrating information from both
                        heterogeneous subjects and sources.
                
                
                    The Study
                    This study examines the practices and experiences of humanities scholars
                        whose work requires crossing the boundaries built into our institutions and
                        information systems. As in our previous work on interdisciplinary
                        scientists, analysis is based on in-depth interviews with researchers who
                        fit the conceptual requirements of the study. The scholars have been
                        recognized for their interdisciplinarity by receiving an appointment at a
                        respected research institute. They have spent time in-residence at the
                        facility, which devotes extensive resources to promoting cross-disciplinary
                        work. The group represents a range of fields, incorporating many different
                        subject areas, methods, and theoretical perspectives.
                    We conducted semi-structured interviews with twenty-five center affiliates.
                        Ten of the scholars were targeted for more in-depth case study, which
                        included follow-up interviews and content and citation analysis of published
                        papers, which is ongoing. The interviews covered how the scholars gather and
                        keep up with information, communicate with colleagues, their reliance on
                        computers and electronic information systems, and their overall scholarly
                        work practices. The sessions averaged about 60 minutes and were audio
                        recorded. Textual accounts of each interview were constructed based on
                        partial transcription of the tapes and field notes. Iterative rounds of
                        descriptive and thematic coding were performed with ATLAS.ti, software
                        designed for qualitative data analysis and theory building. The resulting
                        codes were brought together into conceptual networks that describe
                        strategies, interactions, conditions, and consequences--relations considered
                        significant for grounded theory development [14].
                    Three specific points that relate to computing and the scholarly process
                        emerged from our data. First, digital texts are not widely used, but online
                        bibliographic materials play a consistent yet minor role in the information
                        routines of the scholars. Selected computer-based systems are being adopted
                        with continued heavy reliance on conventional libraries, personal
                        collections, and information gathered through colleague networks. Second,
                        web-based descriptive materials such as catalogs and guides are highly
                        valued, especially in preparation for travel to research collections. They
                        allow scholars to explore the material that surrounds certain items in an
                        archive or library and can provide a path to other relevant sources beyond
                        the boundaries of the collection. Third, information technologies play a
                        significant role in personal communication, information management, the
                        writing process, and the generation of ideas. The interpretation and
                        integration that results from interacting with research materials are
                        embedded in these activities.
                    While it is possible that these findings are representative of humanities
                        scholars in general, the resources and practices of these interdisciplinary
                        researchers are best understood as part of the "dialectic process" that is
                        the true method of interdisciplinary work [5]. The scanning, gathering,
                        compiling, consulting, and verifying of evidence and ideas garnered from
                        texts, people, and other sources are instrumental to this process of
                        exchange and synthesis. In order to work across multiple intellectual
                        domains, these scholars develop strategies for extending the scope of their
                        information field. For example, they are eclectic readers and active
                        browsers who regularly probe for leads in outside domains. At the same time
                        they place particular emphasis on what might be called "push" information
                        sources that deliver diverse information directly into their work routines
                        through channels such as listserves, editorial and reviewing activities, and
                        cross-disciplinary colleague relationships sustained through e-mail and
                        conferences. As a result, potentially fortuitous discoveries in peripheral
                        subject areas increase, and scholars develop links with reliable sources and
                        "locals" to assist in explaining and validating material from unfamiliar
                        territories. Likewise, basic resources such as reference works and textbooks
                        are essential for verification and self-education. As would be expected,
                        complications related to language and audience are pronounced. The natural
                        language used in the humanities is much less effective for communicating and
                        identifying analogies [1], [2] across domains than the more cryptic
                        representations used in scientific discourse.
                
                
                    Conclusion
                    Complex arrays of interrelated activities, information, and intellectual
                        communities are formed through the practice of interdisciplinary
                        scholarship. The composites constructed through the work of these scholars
                        can serve as a schematic of the content, functions, and relationships that
                        are vital to information environments designed for interdisciplinarians in
                        the humanities. Our long-term studies of both interdisciplinary and more
                        discipline-based humanities scholars will continue to document their
                        transition to the evolving "hybrid library" [11]. As we continue to follow
                        scholars, over time we hope to be able to discern anticipated changes in the
                        dynamics of knowledge creation, exchange, and distribution [4], as they
                        emerge.
                
            
        
        
            
                References
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Bawden
                                
                            
                            Information Systems and the Stimulation of
                                Creativity
                        
                        
                            Journal of Information Science
                            
                                12
                                
                                203-216
                                1986
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Kenneth
                                    A.
                                    Cory
                                
                            
                            Discovering Hidden Analogies in an Online Humanities
                                Database
                        
                        
                            Computers in the Humanities
                            
                                31
                                
                                1-12
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Birger
                                    Hjorland
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Hanne
                                    Albrechtsen
                                
                            
                            Toward a New Horizon in Information Science: Domain
                                Analysis
                        
                        
                            Journal of the American Society for Information
                                Science
                            
                                46
                                6
                                400-425
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Susan
                                    
                                    Hockey
                                
                            
                            Computer Networking and Textual Sources in the
                                Humanities
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Teresa
                                    M.
                                    Harrison
                                
                            
                            
                                Timothy
                                Stephen
                            
                            Computer Networking and Scholarly Communication in the
                                Twenty-First-Century
                            
                                ALbany, NY
                                 State University of New York
                                1996
                                83-93
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Julie
                                    Thompson
                                    Klein
                                
                            
                            Crossing Boundaries: Knowledge, Disciplinarities, and
                                Interdisciplinarities
                            
                                Charlottesville and London
                                University Press of Virginia
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    M.
                                    Levy
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Cathy
                                    C.
                                    Marshall
                                
                            
                            Going Digital: A Look at Assumptions Underlying Digital
                                Libraries
                        
                        
                            Communications of the ACM
                            
                                38
                                4
                                77-84
                                April 1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Laura
                                    J.
                                    Neumann
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Ann
                                    P.
                                    Bishop
                                
                            
                            From Usability to Use: Measuring the Success of
                                Testbeds in the Real World
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the 35th Annual GSLIS Clinic, March 22-
                                24, 1998
                            
                                Urbana, IL
                                Graduate School of Library and Information
                                    Science
                                forthcoming
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Carole
                                    L.
                                    Palmer
                                
                            
                            Aligning Studies of Information Seeking and Use with
                                Domain Analysis
                        
                        
                            Journal of the American Society for Information
                                Science
                            
                                
                                (50th anniversary issue)
                                
                                forthcoming
                            
                        
                    

                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Carole
                                    L.
                                    Palmer
                                
                            
                            The Information Connection in Scholarly
                                Synthesis
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Raymond
                                    G.
                                    McInnis
                                
                            
                            Discourse Synthesis: A Volume Dedicated to the History
                                and Theory of Knowledge Cumulation
                            
                                Westport, CT
                                Greenwood Press
                                forthcoming
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Carole
                                    L.
                                    Palmer
                                
                            
                            Structures and Strategies of Interdisciplinary
                                Science
                        
                        
                            Journal of the American Society for Information
                                Science
                            
                                50
                                3
                                242-253
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Chris
                                    Rusbridge
                                
                            
                            Towards the Hybrid Library
                        
                        
                            D-Lib Magazine
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                July/August 1998
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Susan
                                    Leigh
                                    Star
                                
                            
                            Working Together: Symbolic Interactionism, Activity
                                Theory and Information Systems
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Yrjo
                                    Engestrom
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Middleton
                                
                            
                            Communication and Cognition at Work
                            
                                Cambridge, MA
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1996
                                296-318
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Susan
                                    Leigh
                                    Star
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Karen
                                    Ruhleder
                                
                            
                            Steps towards an Ecology of Infrastructure: Design and
                                Access for Large Information Spaces
                        
                        
                            Information Systems Research
                            
                                7
                                1
                                111-134
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Anselm
                                    Strauss
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Juliet
                                    Corbin
                                
                            
                            The Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory
                                Procedures and Techniques
                            
                                Newbury Park, CA
                                Sage
                                1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Howard
                                    D.
                                    White
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Katherine
                                    W.
                                    McCain
                                
                            
                            Visualization of Literatures
                        
                        
                            Annual Review of Information Science and
                                Technology
                            
                                37
                                
                                99-168
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
