

    
        
            
                The American Century Project: Bringing into Critical Parity Primary Source Materials, Their Visualization, and Their Composite Analysis
                
                    
                        Alexander
                        Ben
                    
                    Stanford University Digital Lit. Lab, United States of America
                    balexand@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Brown
                        David
                    
                    University of California Los Angeles
                    dwestbrown@ucla.edu
                
                
                    
                        Mescal
                        Alexandra
                    
                    University of California Riverside
                    alexandra.dolan-mescal@ucr.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    American Culture
                    American History
                    Hollywood
                    American Television
                    Broadway Theatre
                    Cold War
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    art history
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    film and cinema studies
                    gender studies
                    historical studies
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    interface and user experience design
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    literary studies
                    music
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    information architecture
                    content analysis
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    linguistics
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    cultural studies
                    visualisation
                    history of Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    folklore and oral history
                    cultural infrastructure
                    maps and mapping
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This workshop offers an intellectual and administrative overview of The American Century project. As described, The American Century presents a digital historiography of American culture from approximately 1890 to 1990. The primacy of the project remains an accessible visual platform that allows for new points of entry into the interpretation of The American Century by giving new agency to primary source materials across a broadened range of American cultural evidences, and integrating these archival substantiations with interpretive matrices (algorithms) that allow for newly (and broadly comparative) cultural and historical interpretations of the conceptualization and evolution of The American Century.
            Most succinctly, this shapes a new environment for the critical study of American intellectual, cultural, and popular history that further intends a composite parity to primary source materials, and presents them within an intellectual equivalency that balances contemporary strategies of visual access with new processes of comparative analytics.
            It is envisioned that this workshop will comprise between 15 and 20 participants from a breadth of technical, academic, and professional backgrounds, including archivists, cultural historians, digital humanities scholars, and scholars and researchers from digital analytics. The purpose of this diverse audience is to exercise the project’s assumptions that sensitive representations of 21st-century cultural historiography will require such a diverse body of cooperating scholars and professionals. 
            The workshop will cover approximately three hours and follow this structure:
             • 10 minutes, introductions.
             • 30-minute orientation to the intellectual and technical origins of The American Century Project. Discussion title: ‘The Seen, the Unseen, and the Newly Seen: The American Century (Re)Remembered’.
             • 15-minute break.
             • 45-minute discussion: ‘All Cultural Is Palimpsestual: (Re)Visualizing Primary Sources in 21st-Century Historiographical Contexts’. This discussion will address new intellectual conceptualizations of primary source materials within 21st-century digital matrices and the logistics (copyright, logistics of working with a breadth of media, popular conceptualizations of American culture, etc.) of compositing these materials into a singular point of historiography. We will further explore the logistics of building cooperation among archivists, academics, digital professionals, and others and how to orient the project for its inclusion in graduate teaching curriculum and provide opportunity for student contribution.
             • 15-minute break.
             • 45-minute discussion: ‘How We Built It’. This section provides sequential orientation to the technical construction of the project with emphasis on decision-making processes re: technical specs and strategies of visualization and comparative analytics.
             • Remaining time: questions and open discussion. 
        
    
