


    
        
            
                Écriture féminine:
                    Searching for an Indefinable Practice?
                
                    
                        Mark
                        Olsen
                        
                            University of Chicago
                            mark@barkov.uchicago.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Some 25 years ago, Hélène Cixous provocatively anticipated a distinctly female
                    practice of writing. She declared that écriture
                        féminine would be marked by characteristics which challenge the logic
                    of writing within the “phallocentric” tradition, by its focus on the female
                    body, glorying in a femininity too long repressed, and breaking up received
                    truth through laughter. Her argument, based on her view of the poetic, implies a
                    form of “false consciousness” in that not all women would, or even could,
                    produce texts from this alternative practice. Further, she declared that écriture féminine cannot be defined or identified
                    outside of itself: 
                        It is impossible to define a feminine
                            practice of writing, and this is an impossibility that will remain, for
                            this practice can never be theorized, enclosed, encoded, coded —which
                            doesn’t mean that it doesn’t exist. But it will always surpass the
                            discourse that regulates the phallocentric system: it does and will take
                            place in areas other than those subordinated to
                            philosophical-theoretical domination. It will be conceived of only by
                            subjects who are breakers of automatisms, by peripheral figures that no
                            authority can ever subjugate.
                        
                            Hélène Cixous, "The Laugh of the Medusa" in Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 1:4
                                (1976) 883.
                        
                    
                A generation of French and America feminist critics have addressed Cixous’
                    declaration, pro and con, which is based on two questionable propositions: that
                        écriture féminine cannot be defined outside of
                    its own terms and that not all women writing may be said to participate in this
                    unique practice.
                It is unfortunate that so important a declaration would be auto-marginalized by
                    positing its own epistemological and social indefinability. While Cixous may be
                    right, that a practice of women’s writing would be hard to identify, she carries
                    her attack of “phallocentric systems” of knowledge—rationality and logic—to such
                    an extreme that any attempt to demonstrate the possibility of the existence of,
                    or isolate some of the characteristics of, an écriture
                        féminine is invalidated. I would argue, however, that any putative
                    feminine practice of writing should be identifiable as recessive traits in the
                    literary production of women who predate Cixous’s declaration and that these
                    traits may be detected using systematic methodologies.
                A considerable body of recent work on gender marking in language use shows
                    important, even critical, differences in male and female use of language.See for example, Deborah Tannen, You just don't
                            understand: Women and men in conversation (Ballantine, 1990) and
                            Gender and discourse (Oxford, 1994).
                    While much of this work has been restricted to less formal forms of
                    communication—speech, e-mail, and student essays—there is some evidence that
                    gender is an important discriminant in more formal literary texts. For example,
                    Minna Palander-Collin finds in her study of 17th century private letters that
                    there are marked differences between female and male writing, suggesting that
                    the women's letters are more interactional, personal and “involved” than letters
                    by men, which are common features of women’s communication in Present-Day
                        English.Minna Palander-Collin, "Male and female styles in 17th
                        century correspondence: I THINK", in Language Variation and
                            Change, 11 (1999), 123-141. More generally, recent
                    studies by Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon and Anat Shimoni have detected a wide
                    variety of simple lexical and syntactic feature differences in literary texts by
                    men and women in the British National Corpus (BNC). Using machine learning
                    techniques, they are able to infer the gender of an author of an unseen document
                    with approximately 80% accuracy, with moderately better performance for works of
                    fiction than nonfiction.Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon, Jonathan Fine
                        and Amat Shimoni, "Automatically Categorizing Written Texts by Author
                        Gender", forthcoming in Literary and Linguistic
                            Computing (2003) and Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon, Jonathan Fine
                        and Amat Shimoni, "Differences in Writing Style Between Male and Female
                        Authors" (paper submitted for publication). The success of text
                    categorization techniques to identify modern literary texts by gender of author
                    suggests that there are gendered practices of writing and that these gendered
                    traditions are grounded in the history of literary culture and would be an
                    important component of Cixous’ prospective écriture
                        féminine.
                In the early 1990s, I attempted to examine the question of écriture féminine using the ARTFL database, only to be confronted by
                    the very significant gender bias of the TLF database as it was then constituted,
                    concluding that the sample of texts by women (3.8% of the titles) was too
                    limited to allow for useful comparisons. This limitation led directly to our
                    ongoing effort to digitize a large collection of French literary texts by women,
                    ARTFL’s French Women Writers ProjectARTFL's French Women Writers
                        Project is one of many projects to digitize neglected literary and
                        non-literary texts by women, most inspired by the Brown Women Writers
                        Project, including the University of Chicago Library's Italian Women Writers
                        and commercial products such as Alexander Street Press' North American Women's Letters and Diaries. See  for a
                        partial list of current projects and products. to redress the gender
                    bias of the corpus which was used to compile the TLF dictionary. The gender bias
                    in the data used to compile a massive and “definitive” dictionary is itself an
                    important example of one mechanism of how patriarchal language is propagated and
                        authorized."Gender representation and histoire des mentalités: Language and Power in the Trésor de la langue française," in Histoire et measure VI (1991): 349-73. My initial
                    studies of gender representation in early modern and modern French—based
                    exclusively on male writers describing the feminine —produced some striking
                    examples of long-term shifts in the use and meaning of common gender terms, such
                    as femme."Quantitative Linguistics and
                            Histoire des mentalités: Gender
                        Representation in the Trésor de la langue
                        française, in R. Köhler and B. B. Rieger (eds.), Contributions to Quantitative Linguistics (Kluwer, 1993), pp.
                        361-381. Age categorization of women— young/old—becomes one of the
                    most notable patterns only towards the end of the 18th century, reflecting both
                    the rise of the romantic novel and a new politics of desire. Equally important
                    are long-term continuities, such as the collocation of femme with possessives, suggesting that the semantic field of the
                    feminine begins with putting her “in her place,” being possessed by a male.See also Tuija Pulkkinen, "The History of Gender Concepts: The Concept
                        of Woman", in History of Concepts Newsletter, 5
                        (2002), 2-5. Cixous’ complaint that “woman has always functioned
                    ‘within’ the discourse of man” simply because women must express themselves in
                    “the language of men and their grammar”Cixous, p. 887. is a
                    position that is certainly implied by my initial studies and needs to be taken
                    into account when characterizing earlier examples of feminine writing.
                In order to examine possible earlier practices of écriture
                        féminine, I am assembling two corpora of about 350 literary texts
                    each by male and female authors from the 17th to the early 20th century,
                    balanced by time period, genre, and subject matter (or collection). The women’s
                    texts are drawn from a variety of current holdings at ARTFL, including 110 texts
                    in French Women Writers, 70 from the ARTFL database, 40 from BASILE (Editions
                    Champion), and 130 from various collections produced by Editions
                        Bibliopolis.Links to the ARTFL/PhiloLogic implementations of
                        these collections may be found at .
                    The comparative male corpus will be selected from the same sources. Comparisons
                    of the two corpora will be based on several distinct types of analysis.
                        A comparative overview of the two corpora using the combination of
                            some of the relatively simple lexical and syntactic features used by
                            Koppel and his team, broken down by time period;
                        A comparison of collocations of gender terms (femme, homme, mari, mère, etc.),
                            loosely based on results from my earlier studies, effectively looking at
                            how men and women represent themselves and the other gender, again
                            broken down by period and genre.
                        Examination of the “agency” of male and female actors as represented
                            by the tense and the functional status of selected verbs associated with
                            gender denoting terms.
                        And a general assessment of the pragmatics associated with literary
                            writing by males and females, by looking at use of hedges as well as the
                            density of pronouns and adjectives.
                    
                Finally, following Pulkkinen’s call to consider the history of the concept of
                    “woman” as a political construct, I would like to look at contrasting
                    representations of social groups—inclusive and exclusive use of nous and other terms denoting belonging—a technique
                    well known in lexicologie politique."Enlightened Nationalism in the Early Revolution" The nation in the Language of the Société de
                            1789 in Canadian Journal of History
                        (24), 1994, p. 28ff Using a combination of quantitative and
                    systematic qualitative approaches to the two corpora, I hope to show changing
                    patterns of gendered writing in French literature over a several century
                    span.
                The continued expansion and improvement of electronic text holdings, in terms of
                    the quality of the data as well as coverage of wider ranges of literatures well
                    outside of established national canons, allows us to revisit theoretical and
                    substantive problematics that we could not address previously. Women's writing
                    is surely a case-in-point of this laudable development, facilitating systematic
                    examinations of propositions made by critics and theorists like Hélène Cixous.
                    Identification of the practices and distinguishable characteristics of écriture féminine in the centuries predating her “call
                    to the pen” may help situate the traditions of gendered discourse the past as
                    well as their relationship to current feminine writing.
            
        
    
