


    
        
            
                A Controlled-Corpus Experiment in Authorship
                    Identification by Cross-Entropy
                
                    
                        Patrick
                        Juola
                        
                            Duquesne University
                            juola@mathcs.duq.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Harald
                        Baayen
                        
                            Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
                            baayen@mpi.nl
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                This paper describes an authorship, and more generally document classification,
                    experiment on a difficult Dutch corpus of university writings. By measuring
                    linguistic distances using a cross-entropy technique, a technique sensitive not
                    only to the distributions of language features, but also to their relative
                    intersequencing, classification judgments can be made with great sensitivity,
                    significance, confidence, and accuracy. In particular, despite the designed
                    difficulty of the Dutch corpus used, the technique was still able to reliably
                    detect not only authorship, but also subtle features of register, topic, and
                    even the educational attainments of the author.
                Authorship attribution has received significant attention in recent years as a
                    testbed and touchstone for new theories of authorial markers and linguistic
                    statistics; (Holmes, 1998) presents a brief historical outline of some major
                    theories. One of the current front-runners, proposed in (Burrows, 1989),
                    suggests that a strong cue to authorship can be gleaned from a principle
                    components’ analysis (PCA) of the most common function words in a document. Like
                    most statistical techniques, a scholar’s ability to apply this technique is
                    limited by the usual features of sample size, sample representativeness, and
                    test power. Another popular technique, linear discriminant analysis (LDA), may
                    be able to distinguish among previously chosen classes, but as a supervised
                    algorithm, it has so many degrees of freedom that the discriminants it infers
                    may not be “clinically” significant. An alternative technique using measurements
                    of cross-entropy (Wyner, 1996; Juola, 1997, 2003) might be a better tool under
                    difficult circumstances because it is capable of extracting more information
                    (and thus distinguish more readily) along perceptually salient lines from a
                    given data set.
                The corpus studied by Baayen, Van Halteren, Neijt, and Tweedie (Baayen, et al.
                    2002) has been specifically developed to be a difficult problem in authorship
                    attribution. This corpus consists of small writing samples taken from
                    undergraduate students at the University of Nijmegen on carefully and closely
                    controlled topics. Eight students, four first-year and four fourth-year, were
                    asked to write nine essays (for a total of 72) on the same set of
                    closely-specified topics. These topics included three samples of fiction (for
                    example, a retelling of the fairy tale of “Roodkapje,” the Dutch equivalent of
                    “Little Red Riding Hood”), three of argumentative writing, and three of
                    descriptive writing. Document sizes varied from approximately 3600 to 7600
                    words. These documents were analyzed using cross-entropy and the results
                    compared to analysis via PCA and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (Baayen et
                    al., 2001) to see both what the appropriate dimensions of variation were, and
                    whether or not authorship attribution was practical in this tightly controlled a
                    setting.
                Analysis using function word PCA showed a marked lack of significant and useful
                    results. Baayen et all found “no authorial structure,” although education level
                    and to a lesser extent genre were separated. LDA also could not reliably
                    identify author, and in most experiments performed at chance level. First, as
                    expected, the overall cross-entropy distances showed an extremely strong ability
                    to sort documents by topic (grouping all “Roodkapje” stories together, for
                    instance). Statistical analysis, however, shows a strong (and significant)
                    tendency to within-group homogeneity across all dimensions of interest : topic,
                    genre, author, and even year in school. In particular, the average within-group
                    distance, excluding identity measurements, is significantly less than the
                    average without-group measurement. This holds true, irrespective of whether
                    groups are defined by authorship (p &lt; 0.000001), register (p &lt;
                    10-15), or even education level (p &lt; 0.0084). This suggests that
                    cross-entropy can be usefully deployed to author identification in this corpus. 
                A further test revealed that, for every document in the corpus and for every pair
                    of authors, a potential authorship dispute can be resolved approximately 73% of
                    the time using cross-entropy. Furthermore, applying a fractionation technique to
                    restrict attention to only the function words (Juola, 1998; Juola and Baayen, in
                    preparation) could improve these results to 86% correct identification. This can
                    be compared to a best published result of 82% obtained by Baayen et al. using an
                    enhanced LDA model.
                Although the enhanced version of LDA performed substantially better, it should be
                    noted, however, that LDA is a supervised technique, and itself makes strong
                    assumptions about the nature of the authorial problem that make it unsuitable to
                    exploratory, unsupervised study.
                Even when one restricts the samples to a mere 500 words each, analysis still
                    yields 63% of the pairwise comparisons correctly made, better than any result
                    using PCA or standard (unenhanced) LDA. These results improve upon principle
                    components analysis and standard linear discriminant analysis, with remarkable
                    economy of calculation.
                The improved performance can be attributed to information used by cross-entropy
                    but not by word-frequency histograms, specifically in ordering and sequencing of
                    (function) words. Function word PCA performs well by using the relative presence
                    or absence of function words as a cue and/or proxy for idiosyncratic syntactic
                    patterns. Cross-entropy can distinguish not only a difference in
                    presence/absence, but also a difference in relative sequencing. This additional
                    source of information can allow more reliable inferences to be drawn from
                    corpora and more subtle distinctions to be made. In theory, the idea that
                    sequencing is more distinguishing than “mere” presence or absence could be
                    applied to almost any form of linguistic data and any task. Irrespective of what
                    feature sets are eventually found to be informative for authorship attribution,
                    it is to be expected that sequences of features will probably outperform
                    unordered bags of features in making fine distinctions.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Baayen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    van Halteren
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Niejt
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    F.
                                    Tweedie
                                
                            
                            An experiment in authorship attribution
                        
                        
                            JADT 2002
                            
                                
                                
                                2002
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    F.
                                    Burrows
                                
                            
                            An Ocean where each Kind...: Statistical Analysis and
                                Some Major Determinants of Literary style
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                23
                                4-5
                                309-21
                                1989
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    I.
                                    Holmes
                                
                            
                            The Evolution of Stylometry in Humanities
                                Computing.
                        
                        
                            Literary and Linguistic Computing
                            
                                13
                                3
                                111-7
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Juola
                                
                            
                            What can we do with small corpora? Document
                                categorization via cross-entropy
                        
                        
                            SimCat 1997
                            
                                
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Juola
                                
                            
                            Measuring Linguistic Complexity : The Morphological
                                Tier
                        
                        
                            Journal of Quantitative Linguistics
                            
                                5
                                3
                                206-14
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Juola
                                
                            
                            The Time Course of Language Change
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                37
                                1
                                
                                2003
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Juola
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Baayen
                                
                            
                            Fractionation as a technique for improving document
                                analysis
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                (in preparation)
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Wyner
                                
                            
                            Entropy estimation and patterns
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Workshop on Information Theory
                            
                                
                                
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
