


    
        
            
                The Screen or the Window: A Critical Proposal for
                    Reading Computer Representations
                
                    
                        Michele
                        White
                        
                            Wellesley College
                            mwhite@wellesley.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The structuring qualities of the computer screen play an important part in how we
                    understand the Internet and other computer-facilitated representations but they
                    are rarely addressed in the critical literature. In this presentation, I
                    consider how the screen and mediation remain largely invisible because the
                    Internet is described as a material setting that users inhabit. I provide a
                    brief study of popular and academic narratives and focus on renderings of the
                    computer and Internet as a window or entrance that appear in telepresence art
                    works, webcams, and advertisements for computer screens. Close visual and
                    textual analysis and critical considerations of photography’s referential
                    aspects are employed. These methodologies provide a way to highlight the
                    computer screen and encourage an alternative understanding of the computer and
                    Internet.
                The tendency to engage with the computer and Internet as physical and animate has
                    significant ramifications. Our conceptualization of the medium determines the
                    questions that we can ask and whether the representational aspects of
                    stereotypes can be perceived and critiqued. Judith Mayne has argued that
                    feminist film theorists such as Laura Mulvey have attributed “the polarity of
                    gender, of masculinity versus femininity, to the very structures of pleasure and
                    identification in the classical cinema” (48). Computers and Internet settings
                    employ similar devices. However, the forms of identification produced by
                    computers and Internet settings have an even more consequential effect because
                    users spend significant amounts of time engaging with computers; computers and
                    networks also appear in film, television, and print advertising; dream or
                    trance-like experiences are often part of the engagement; the user’s
                    identification with characters and other representations can be intense; and
                    there is an idea that people are alive and their bodies are accessible through
                    the Internet.
                Considering the screen rather than the delivered representations is difficult
                    because of the rhetoric about physical and populated Internet settings. For
                    instance, Esther Dyson makes it appear like people live on the Internet rather
                    than use it when she states that “the Net includes all the people, cultures, and
                    communities that live in it” (2). Eduardo Kac uses his telepresence artwork,
                        Teleporting an Unknown State (1994/96, 1998, and
                    2001), to render the “Internet as a life-supporting system” (Kac) and suggests
                    that there is “Birth, growth, and death on the Internet” (Kac a). Such
                    narratives about people inhabiting the setting and live interfaces are connected
                    to early descriptions of the computer and Internet. William Gibson suggests that
                    physical settings and screens will combine in the first sentence to Neuromancer when he states that “the sky above the port
                    was the color of television, tuned to a dead channel” (3). Gibson starts Neuromancer, which had a significant effect on computer
                    culture, with the screen but he displaces its constructed aspects with live
                    programs, cyber “space,” and populated interfaces.
                Internet sites continue to provide “welcome” messages, invitations to enter, and
                    depictions of spatial progressions. For instance, the webcam operator Gwen
                    encourages the spectator to “enter the life of a college student” and Cindy
                    coaxes the spectator to “ENTER ... with an open mind.” A variety or
                    multi-purpose sites are referred to as “portals” and Gretchen Barbatsis, Michael
                    Fegan, and Kenneth Hansen indicate that spectators “engage the computer screen
                    as a gateway to another place.” Window-like effects are employed because they
                    seem to provide views “onto” other terrain, articulate an inside and outside,
                    and suggest that computers and the Internet deliver a continuous spatial
                    landscape. Thomas J. Campanella suggests that “Webcams, the Web’s windows on the
                    world, knit the Net to the physical spaces we inhabit. The accompanying
                    illustration by Jack Desrocher supports this conception by depicting the
                    computer monitor as a curtained window that is incorporated into the home
                    setting. Such renderings make representations seem to be part of the lived space
                    of the spectator.
                The conception that the computer and Internet are a window or portal, which
                    provides an entrance into other places, is related to societal conceptions of
                    photography. Photographic images are often talked about as if they provided
                    direct access to the thing depicted—the referent—rather than being
                    representations. This cultural conception is conveyed by Susan Sontag when she
                    states that photography is “not only an image (as a painting is an image) an
                    interpretation of the real; it is also a trace, something directly stenciled off
                    the real” (154). Internet sites often use data, texts, and graphics instead of
                    digitized photos and digital imaging technologies to make representations seem
                    real. However, society’s usual conception of photography can still provide
                    another example of a technology and cultural form in which the framed aspects of
                    images are often ignored. Histories of photography and other referential
                    media-like film and television-indicate that the physical and animate aspects
                    attributed to the computer and Internet are not unique and that these renderings
                    should be associated with other produced forms. Such photography theorists as
                    Rosalind Krauss, Martha Rosler and John Tagg, also offer some significant
                    literature to employ in engaging with the produced and framed aspects of
                    computer and Internet renderings.
                A re-employment of the photographic vocabulary of cropping and rectangular
                    formats can highlight the relationship between individual screen elements,
                    software windows, and monitors. Noting and articulating the repetitive aspects
                    of computer and Internet representations can also indicate that it is cultural
                    conventions rather than people that are conveyed. For instance, Tagg argues that
                    realism “works by the controlled and limited recall of a reservoir of similar
                    ‘texts,’ by a constant repetition, a constant cross-echoing” (99). Such critical
                    considerations of photography may be more productive in highlighting the
                    produced aspects of computer and Internet settings than in helping society to
                    engage with photography differently. Computers and Internet settings rarely
                    employ traces of material objects in the ways this concept operates in
                    photography. The redeployment of photography theory can also begin to render a
                    new vocabulary for describing and conceptualizing these settings. We should
                    continue to consider other possibilities for speaking, writing, designing, and
                    visually rendering the Internet since these acts produce the setting.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Gretchen
                                    Barbatsis
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Fegan
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Kenneth
                                    Hansen
                                
                            
                            The Performance of Cyberspace: An Exploration into
                                Computer-Mediated Reality
                        
                        
                            Journal of Computer Mediated Communication
                            
                                5
                                1
                                
                                September 1999
                            
                        
                        22 Mar. 2002 &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    J.
                                    Campanella
                                
                            
                            Be There Now
                        
                        
                            salon.com
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                7 Aug. 1997
                            
                        
                        30 June 2002 &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Cindy
                                    
                                
                            
                            Intro
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        13 Jan. 2001 &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Esther
                                    Dyson
                                
                            
                            Introduction. Release 2.0: A Design for Living in the
                                Digital Age
                            
                                New York
                                Broadway Books
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    William
                                    Gibson
                                
                            
                            Neuromancer
                            
                                New York
                                Ace Books
                                1984
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Gwen
                                    
                                
                            
                            Gwencam
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        19 Oct. 2000 &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Eduardo
                                    Kac
                                
                            
                            Teleporting an Unknown State
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        26 Jan. 2003 &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Eduardo
                                    Kac
                                
                            
                            Teleporting an Unknown State
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        26 Jan. 2003 &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Judith
                                    Mayne
                                
                            
                            Feminist Film Theory and Criticism
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Diane
                                    Carson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Linda
                                    Dittmar
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Janice
                                    R.
                                    Welsch
                                
                            
                            Multiple Voices in Feminist Film Criticism
                            
                                Minneapolis
                                U. of Minnesota P
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Susan
                                    Sontag
                                
                            
                            The Image World
                        
                        
                            On Photography
                            
                                New York
                                Penguin Books
                                1977
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    John
                                    Tagg
                                
                            
                            A Means of Surveillance: The Photograph as Evidence in
                                the Law
                        
                        
                            The Burden of Representation: Essays on Photographies
                                and Histories
                            
                                Minneapolis
                                U of Minnesota P
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
