


    
        
            
                Primarily History: Historians' Search for Primary
                    Resource Materials
                
                    
                        Helen
                        Tibbo
                        
                            UNC-CH
                            tibbo@ils.unc.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    OVERVIEW.
                    This paper will present findings from the Primarily History project,
                        concerning how historians are locating primary sources in the early years of
                        the digital age. Primarily History, an international study housed at the
                        University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the University of Glasgow,
                        also explores how historians teach their students to find such research
                        materials and how archivists and librarians can facilitate this education
                        and resource discovery and use. Data provided here reflect
                        information-seeking behaviors of historians working in the United
                        States.
                
                
                    NEW PATHWAYS TO PRIMARY RESOURCES.
                    Historical research has long been a detective game. While ascertaining the
                        veracity and authenticity of primary resources and the critical
                        interpretation of documents within the context of historical and cultural
                        understanding lie at the heart of historical scholarship, the not so trivial
                        task of locating these materials that serve as the grist of history, must
                        precede any high level analysis. Throughout the 20th century, historians
                        sought the materials they needed to shed light on the past in a number of
                        time-tested ways. Studies conducted in the 1970s and 1980s found that
                        historians most often located relevant primary source materials by following
                        references in published histories, talking with colleagues, and searching
                        likely repositories. In a print paradigm these were all appropriate and
                        efficient methodologies. Recent technologies, however, present the historian
                        with many new possibilities for locating research materials that may prove
                        more efficient and even more effective
                    The road to online finding aids and other digitized resources was not an easy
                        one for archival repositories. For the past twenty years archivists have
                        expended a good deal of time, money, intellectual effort, and angst to
                        produce electronic access tools for the collections in their repositories.
                        The first efforts focused on creating MARC/AMC (Machine Readable
                        Cataloging/Archives and Manuscripts Collections) records for online catalogs
                        and bibliographic utilities such as OCLC and RLIN. Many archivists doubted
                        the efficacy of MARC, a library-based standard, for archival description. In
                        the early 1990’s, some pioneering archivists mounted machine-readable text
                        finding aids on gopher sites on the Internet. By the mid-1990s, a small
                        group of archivists were developing the Encoded Archival Description SGML
                        DTD. By the turn of the millennium, most special collection repositories, at
                        least those in larger units such as academic libraries, had some sort of
                        website, many of which contained HTML encoded finding aids. Today, a small
                        but steadily growing number of repositories have EAD finding aids at their
                        websites. These networked tools not only facilitate information discovery,
                        they can also prepare a scholar for a very productive in-person visit to a
                        repository.
                    Today’s historians can study digitized collections of materials online as
                        well as search bibliographic databases with descriptions of both secondary
                        and primary materials. Perhaps most significantly, historians can read,
                        download, or print entire finding aids for collections in a large number of
                        archival and manuscript repositories world wide. Now that there is a
                        significant corpus of finding aids online it is time to explore how
                        researchers such as historians use them and how archivists might make them
                        more useful. While spending a good deal to create electronic access, to
                        date, archivists have conducted few user studies to judge its effectiveness
                        or ascertain the need for enhanced user education.
                
                
                    PRIMARILY HISTORY PROJECT.
                    Funded by the Gladys Kriebel Delmas Foundation, The Primarily History
                        project, a collaboration of the School of Information and Library Science at
                        the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH) and the Humanities
                        Advanced Technology and Information Institute (HATII) at the University of
                        Glasgow, Scotland, is the first international, comparative project to
                        explore historians’ information-seeking behaviors in today’s web-based,
                        networked environments. Perhaps most importantly, we are examining how
                        historians are preparing the next generation of scholars, specifically, what
                        they are teaching their graduate students about information seeking in the
                        digital library environment and how the students are learning to use
                        retrieval tools. This project is also surveying how special collections
                        libraries and archives provide access to these materials and is seeking
                        enhanced models for outreach and user education that will facilitate
                        historians and their students in locating and using primary resources.
                    Through surveys and interviews we are exploring how historians are employing
                        these new tools and techniques. Dr. Tibbo from UNC-CH has surveyed 700
                        historians located at leading U.S. history programs; Dr. Ian Anderson from
                        Glasgow surveyed close to 800 historians working at universities in the
                        United Kingdom. Both investigators followed the surveys with in-depth
                        interviews with a subset of these populations.
                    Questions in the initial stage of this research focused on scholarly
                        information-seeking in archives, manuscript repositories, and special
                        collections libraries. We asked historians how they found the materials upon
                        which they based their research. Questions included: Do they use library
                        catalogs or the OCLC or RLIN databases that contain MARC records of finding
                        aids? Do they use electronic indexes such as Archives USA? Do they search
                        the Web for finding aids using keywords? Do they go directly to the websites
                        of likely repositories and search for materials? The interviews asked
                        historians to describe how they had located primary resource materials for a
                        recent project and what they taught their graduate students regarding
                        information seeking methodologies.
                
                
                    A SAMPLING OF FINDINGS.
                    For many historians working in the United States, the traditional
                        methodologies for locating primary materials remain the most utilized.
                        Ninety-eight percent indicated that they found materials by following leads
                        and citations in printed sources; 77% searched printed bibliographies; 57%
                        consulted printed documentary editions; 73% searched printed finding aids;
                        73% searched printed repository guides; 51% used newspaper files to find
                        other materials; 50% used government documents in this way; and 38% used the
                        now out-of-date printed NUCMC volumes. The most noticeable difference in
                        behaviors across ranks is that only 24% of assistant professors used the
                        printed NUCMC volumes with 40% of all full professors, including
                        distinguished faculty and deans, using this now out-of-date tool.
                        Interestingly, however, only 18% of those individuals who had taught history
                        for 40 years or more searched the printed NUCMC.
                    Use of traditional resources, however, does not preclude the use of digital
                        technologies developed within the last decade and populated with research
                        materials (e.g., a critical mass of electronic finding aids and some
                        digitized documents) only within the last three to four years. Sixty-nine
                        percent of the history scholars used their own institution’s online
                        (library) public access catalog (OPAC) [while digital, and now probably a
                        web-based technology, not really a new approach]; 64% searched other
                        institutions’ OPACs via the Internet; 59% used bibliographic utilities such
                        as RLIN and OCLC; 58% said they looked for information directly on
                        repository websites; 40% indicated that they searched the Web for primary
                        materials using a search engine such as Alta Vista or Google. Twelve percent
                        of respondents indicated they used the Archives USA database, while 14%
                        searched NUCMC online from the Library of Congress website with only 8
                        individuals (3% of respondents) exhibiting both behaviors.
                    At the most superficial level, we can see that historians are using
                        traditional finding tools more heavily than newer approaches but we need
                        qualitative interview data to understand why. It may well be that many
                        individuals are most comfortable employing methodologies they have found
                        useful throughout their careers and that these tools remain sufficient. It
                        may also be that they have not found searching the web or bibliographic
                        utilities very useful. After all, most archival websites have mounted
                        electronic finding aids only since 1996 with many institutions still working
                        on making a significant portion of their inventories web accessible. When we
                        look at the 220 projects with end dates of 1998 or later, 135 or 61% of
                        these researchers visited repository websites within the course of their
                        work and 98 (45%) used web search engines to find relevant collections.
                    Significantly, the historians in this study averaged over twenty years of
                        teaching experience each. This is significant because the initial round of
                        interviews indicated that many of the veteran historians had completed the
                        largest part of their information seeking years ago, having located large
                        stores of records and papers to analyze for many years. These individuals
                        appear to invest little time in learning new information-seeking behaviors.
                        Other individuals who more dramatically shifted topics across projects,
                        might well seek out primary resources during their entire careers.
                
                
                    PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS.
                    While much work remains in this study, it is clear that archivists and
                        special collection curators must both maintain traditional print descriptive
                        tools and create an increasing number of electronic finding aids and
                        digitized documents as historians are employing a wide range of information
                        seeking behaviors. Evidence to date indicates that younger scholars are
                        turning to digital resources more often than their older counterparts but
                        such behaviors may also linked be linked to research topic. Additional
                        interviews, especially with current Ph.D. students will clarify emerging
                        historical research trends in the early years of the Digital Age. Increasing
                        use of the Web for information seeking and virtual trips to repositories
                        demands that archivists create highly accessible websites, study user
                        behavior so as to improve discovery tools, and provide increased user
                        instruction for those who will only visit the collection from afar.
                
            
        
    
