


    
        
            
                Text Markup—Data Structure vs. Data Model
                
                    
                        Allen
                        Renear
                        
                            GSLIS/University of
                                Illinois
                            renear@uiuc.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    SUMMARY
                    For over ten years there have been several carefully argued critiques of the
                        descriptive markup approach to text representation that have for the most
                        part not been adequately answered. Recently an integrated development of
                        some of these criticisms has been presented at length, and with considerable
                        ingenuity and extension, in a widely read article by Dino Buzzetti,
                        published in New Literary History (2002, 33:
                        61–88). In our paper we analyze some of Buzzetti’s criticisms, accepting
                        some but resisting others.
                
                
                    BACKGROUND
                    When the SGML or “descriptive markup” approach to text began to be actively
                        promoted in the mid-1980s, quite a number of criticisms were developed in
                        response to this approach, or, more exactly, to the accompanying theoretical
                        claims, express or implied. In retrospect, it appears today that some of
                        these criticisms have been answered by the proponents of SGML descriptive
                        markup, others have simply faded in apparent significance, and still others,
                        while live issues to some scholars, seem neverless to generate only
                        unproductive repetitive discussions.
                    However there is a particular family of related criticisms that upon careful
                        re-consideration still seem fresh, deep, and, at least given their positive
                        reception, plausible—and yet these criticisms have also been, strangely,
                        largely ignored by the markup community. Some of these arguments were first
                        presented in the late 1980s in a paper titled “Markup Considered Harmful”
                        privately circulated by Darryll Raymond in response to Coombs et al 1987.
                        They were later presented again, in more detail in 1992 in “Markup
                        Reconsidered” (Raymond, Tompa, and Wood 1995); and then were further refined
                        in “From Data Representation to Data Model: Meta-Semantic Issues in the
                        Evolution of SGML” (Raymond, Tompa, Wood 1996).
                    In brief these papers argue that “Markup is not a data model” but rather a
                        “data representation” (Raymond et al 1992), and that while “SGML provides
                        standard representations for documents” a “standard semantics” is required
                        as well (Raymond et al 1996). And then, generalizing from this conclusion,
                        the authors go on to suggest that many of the expectations for SGML-based
                        markup systems, such as TEI, are misplaced.
                    Despite the fact that these were pointed and clearly argued positions, the
                        response from the TEI community, and perhaps more importantly from the
                        theorizing researchers whose ambitious claims were particularly targeted
                        (Coombs et al 1987, DeRose et al 1990, Sperberg-McQueen 1990), appears to
                        have been largely to simply ignore these criticisms.
                    Recently Dino Buzzetti has been re-presenting these arguments, supplementing
                        them with further theoretical extensions, and integrating them with other
                        criticisms of descriptive markup approach, in particular those of Jerome
                        McGann, most recently presented and extended in a new book Radiant Textuality: Literature Since the World Wide Web (New
                        York 2001)—which Buzzetti takes as supporting Raymond’s and his own
                        criticisms. Buzzetti has in fact presented his concerns in several venues
                        over the last 5 years (e.g. Buzzetti 1999a, Buzzetti 1999b), but it is in
                        “Digital Representation and the Text Model” (New Literary
                            History, 2002 33) that he presents these criticisms in a form,
                        and a forum, and a language, in which they can no longer be ignored.
                    Interestingly, this article comes precisely at a moment when some of the
                        theorizing descriptive markup proponents are themselves very actively
                        working in a similar vein. Sperberg-McQueen, who has called for the
                        development of a SGML/XML semantics since at least 1992 (Sperberg-McQueen
                        1992), is leading a project to develop such a semantics now, and Renear, who
                        is member of this project, has also recently claimed, in language similar to
                        that of Buzzetti and Raymond et al, that an SGML document instance per se
                        provides “only a data structure, not a theory” (Renear 2001).
                
                
                    THE CRITICISM
                    Raymond et al argue, as described above, that markup is not a “data model”,
                        but only a data representation that is “fully dependent on external
                        information for meaning”. They note several characteristics that they say
                        confirm that markup is not a data model in the sense that that expression is
                        used in database theory. These include inadequate notions of equivalence,
                        lack of redundancy control, and lack of defined algebraic operators. This
                        claim should not of course be taken simply as a narrow assertion that SGML
                        markup does not meet criteria for being a certain sort of thing as defined
                        in some field or other—the larger point, and in the context of the
                        discussion a plausible one, is that SGML markup will be inadequate for the
                        kinds of theoretical tasks it is being assigned in virtue of failing to have
                        these characteristics. Raymond et al (1995) state that this failure can be
                        remedied either by adding a “formal structure on top of markup systems” or
                        by defining a new abstraction from scratch. Raymond et al prefer the latter
                        because they believe that markup systems are not only a representation
                        rather than a data model, but they are in fact a relatively poor technique
                        for representation. Raymond et al 1996 characterizes this addition of a
                        formal structure as adding “semantics” to SGML.
                    Buzzetti accepts Raymond et al’s criticism of SGML markup. But he goes much
                        further, both in the extent of his theorizing and in the specific nature of
                        his criticisms. With respect to the latter Buzzetti argues that descriptive
                        markup theorists are actually confused, and profoundly so: they conflate the
                        “structure of the representation” with the “structure of the object
                        represented”, or, alternatively, they confuse the “expression” with the
                        “content” of that expression. Supplementing Raymond’s criticism from the
                        perspective of database theory with an opposition from Saussure Buzzetti
                        argues that descriptive markup is an expression whose form is a data
                        structure. But the form of the content of that expression is a “data model”.
                        Neither the expression itself nor its form however, is a data model—as
                        mistakenly believed by the promoters of SGML descriptive markup and the
                        defenders of the OHCO model of text. (Buzzetti goes on to make this point
                        with juxtapositions of other theoretical terms: “format” vs. “formalism”,
                        “syntax” vs. “interpretation”). As examples of this confusion Buzzetti
                        singles out in particular the TEI Guidelines, Coombs et al 1987, and DeRose
                        et al 1990, and Renear et al 1996.
                    “In summary,” Buzzetti says, “we may assert that strongly embedded markup
                        systems [are] inadequate in reference to both the exhaustivity and the
                        functionality of the text representation and model.”
                
                
                    OUR RESPONSE
                    We believe that that there is some truth to both Raymond, Tompa, and Wood’s
                        criticisms, and to Buzzetti’s application of the criticisms. However we
                        believe that both Raymond et al and Buzzetti substantially overstate the
                        case, Raymond somewhat and Buzzetti much more. Such a response may seem too
                        mild to deserve public airing, but it is for two reasons much more important
                        than it sounds: first because of the radical form the criticism takes in
                        Buzzetti, and second because our response might clarify some long confused
                        issues in text encoding.
                    There can be little doubt that many SGML markup enthusiasts have been now and
                        then confused, and, even more frequently, confusing, about the
                        representational nature of SGML document instances. This is mostly because
                        representation itself is conceptually difficult, and subject to a kind of
                        semiotic oscillation between expressing, referring, and exhibiting. And it
                        may also be partly because of carelessness and genuine lapses of clarity and
                        understanding.
                    But Buzzetti makes too much of the fact that we are sometimes awkward about
                        what document instances are, representationally, and exactly how markup does
                        what it does. Notice that for the most part everyone manages the ambiguities
                        quite well, and gets on, successfully more often than not, with various
                        tasks and projects. How could this be the case if there were such a
                        consistent systematic widespread conflation of expression and content? And,
                        in fact, a close examination shows that Buzzetti does not produce evidence
                        for such a systematic conflation, other than the various awkward or
                        unfortunate characterizations mentioned above—and those, while admittedly
                        signs of some failure to fully conceptualize key notions, are far from
                        convincing evidence for systematic conflation.
                    Moreover, there is no evidence that this confusion, such as it is, is
                        connected, as either cause or effect, with a radical unsuitability of SGML
                        markup to express theories about text. (According to Buzzetti “SGML is a
                        data structure representation language” and does not provide a data model;
                        and he echoes the views of Raymond et al that it is, moreover, a bad data
                        structure representation language.) Part of the problem is that Raymond and
                        Buzzetti rely too much in their argument on the specific notion of a “data
                        model” from database theory, and therefore over-react to the failure of SGML
                        to have precisely that sort of data model, or to have a good (i.e.
                        completely or exactly defined) one. Part of the problem is that they demand
                        formalization before admitting that there has been sucessful representation.
                        It cannot be denied that we use SGML document instances to express express
                        facts and theories about texts rather effectively: that is simply an
                        empirical fact. Part of the problem is that in claiming that SGML and XML
                        lack semantics and a defined set of operators, Raymond et al and Buzzetti
                        ignore the fact that both SGML and XML define the semantics of the markup
                        vocabulary in use as an intrinsic part of the application's document type
                        definition. Unlike Raymond et al and Buzzetti, the SGML standard does not
                        assume that the full semantics of an SGML application are captured in full
                        by the SGML formalisms used to declare elements and attributes. Nor does a
                        demand for an exhaustive set of algebraic or other operations seem a
                        promising start for a critique of a markup discipline intended to encourage
                        the reuse of data and the separation of data representation from processing
                        concerns.
                    In this connection Buzzetti’s criticism of the ordered-hierarchy of content
                        objects (OHCO) hypothesis is particularly illuminating, because strikingly
                        unconvincing. Unlike SGML markup, OHCO is obviously not intended as a
                        representation syntax, but rather an abstraction claimed to be,
                        structurally, the general form taken by all texts. As such it actually
                        appears to be roughly the kind of thing that Buzzetti wants for a data
                        model, though without the specific features characteristic of data models in
                        database theory. Buzzetti’s interpretation of OHCO however has it as “not a
                        model of the text, but a possible model of its expression”, just as SGML on
                        Buzzetti’s account, describes not the text, but “the structure of the text’s
                        expression”, consistent with its distinctive role as “a data structure
                        representation language”. But whatever the failures of OCHO as a data model,
                        this is no more than a tortured effort to make things seem worse then they
                        are. The data structures in question have untyped purely logical
                        parent/child relationships, whereas “hierarchy” in OHCO clearly refers to
                            containment—and that is not a purely data
                        structural relationship, despite the obvious formal similarities (asymmetry,
                        transitivity, etc.) that makes tree data structures convenient for
                        representing hierachical containment.
                    It is true that additional formalization of the semantics of SGML markup is a
                        good thing. Formalization will assist in precision, clarity, and
                        computation. It is for that reason that Sperberg-McQueen and others are
                        working to explicate the semantics of XML markup. But while we may regret
                        that such work has not made more progress, or that not everyone understands
                        the need for improved formalization of semantics and “data models”, or that
                        some of our colleagues are sometimes confused about subtle matters of
                        representation, or that we ourselves are now and then confused, or even
                        often confused, we should not conclude that things are worse than they are.
                        Scholars working in SGML descriptive markup are working with languages that
                        do have semantics, and do have “data models”, even if inadequately
                        formalized, or not quite the sort of thing database researchers prefer. And
                        these scholars are at least as often as not quite clear on the difference
                        between expression and content.
                
                
                    CONCLUSION
                    The criticisms of inadequate formalization that began with Raymond et al and
                        that have recently been so intriguingly developed and extended by Buzzetti
                        are important ones that have been mysteriously neglected by the markup
                        community. And the more ambitious criticisms made by Buzzetti of our failure
                        to fully theorize, or at least attempt to clarify, the complexities of
                        representation are perhaps even deeper and more important, and also
                        unfortunately neglected. But the claim that in these failures we see the
                        signs of either a systematic category mistake endemic in the text encoding
                        community, or evidence of a disastrous inadequacy in current techniques,
                        simply has not yet been proven. On the contrary, as we have suggested here,
                        that claim itself seems to be based upon the mistaken notion, ironically
                        reminiscent of the third man argument, that one more formal system will
                        finally bridge the gap between thought and object. There may or may not be a
                        gap, but if there is it will not be closed simply by another formal system,
                        however useful that system may be.
                
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Dino
                                    Buzzetti
                                
                            
                            Text Representation and Textual Models
                        
                        
                            ACH-ALLC'99 Conference Proceedings
                            
                                Charlottesville
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Dino
                                    Buzzetti
                                
                            
                            Digital Representation and the Text Model
                        
                        
                            New Literary History
                            
                                33
                                
                                
                                2002
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    James
                                    H.
                                    Coombs
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    H.
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Steven
                                    J.
                                    DeRose
                                
                            
                            Markup Systems and the Future of Scholarly Text
                                Processing
                        
                        
                            Communications of the ACM
                            
                                30
                                11
                                
                                November 1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Steven
                                    J.
                                    DeRose
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    G.
                                    Durand
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Elli
                                    Mylonas
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    H.
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            What Is Text, Really?
                        
                        
                            Journal of Computing in Higher Education
                            
                                1
                                2
                                
                                1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jerome
                                    McGann
                                
                            
                            Radiant Textuality: Literature Since the World Wide
                                Web
                            
                                New York
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Darrell
                                    R.
                                    Raymond
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Frank
                                    W.
                                    Tompa
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Derrick
                                    Wood
                                
                            
                            Markup Reconsidered
                        
                        
                            First International Workshop on Principles of Document
                                Processing, Washington, D.C., October, 1992
                            
                                
                                
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Darrell
                                    Raymond
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Frank
                                    Tompa
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Derrick
                                    Wood
                                
                            
                            From Data Representation to Data Model: Meta-Semantic
                                Issues in the Evolution of SGML
                        
                        
                            Computer Standards and Interfaces
                            
                                18
                                1
                                
                                January 1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Dubin
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Claus
                                    Huitfeldt
                                
                            
                            Towards a Semantics For XML Markup
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Document
                                Engineering ACM, November 2002
                            
                                
                                
                                2002
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Elli
                                    Mylonas
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    G.
                                    Durand
                                
                            
                            Refining Our Notion of What Text Really Is: The Problem
                                of Overlapping Hierarchies
                        
                        
                            Research in Humanites Computing
                            
                                Oxford
                                
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            Raising the Bar, Text Encoding from a Logical Point of
                                View
                        
                        
                            CLiP 2001
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            Back to the Frontiers and Edges
                        
                        
                            Closing remarks at “SGML '92: the quiet revolution”
                                conference sponsored by the Graphic Communications Association
                                (GCA), Boston, 29 October 1992
                            
                                
                                
                                1992
                            
                        
                        Available on the Web at 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Claus
                                    Huitfeldt
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            Meaning and Interpretation in Markup
                        
                        
                            Markup Languages: Theory and Practice
                            
                                
                                MIT Press
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Dubin
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Claus
                                    Huitfeldt
                                
                            
                            Drawing Inferences on the Basis of Markup
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of Extreme Markup 2002
                            
                                
                                
                                2002
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
