


    
        
            
                Texts into Databases: The Evolving Field of New-Style
                    Prosopography
                
                    
                        John
                        Bradley
                        
                            King's College London
                            john.bradley@kcl.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Harold
                        Short
                        
                            King's College London
                            harold.short@kcl.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Centre for Computing in the Humanities at King’s College London is involved
                    in three broadly Prosopographical projects: the Prosopography
                        of the Byzantine Empire (PBE) (recently renamed Prosopography of the Byzantine World—PBW), the Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England (PASE), and the Clergy of the Church of England Database (CCE). (All are
                    funded by the UK’s Arts and Humanities Research Board.)
                The goals of these three projects at King’s are ambitious. PBE’s goal is “to
                    record in a computerised relational database all surviving information about
                    every individual mentioned in Byzantine sources during the period from 641 to
                    1261, and every individual mentioned in non-Byzantine sources during the same
                    period who is ‘relevant’ (on a generous interpretation) to Byzantine affairs.”
                    (from website, see references). PASE’s aim is “to provide a comprehensive
                    biographical register of recorded inhabitants of Anglo-Saxon England (c.
                    450-1066).” (from website). CCE intends to create a “database of clergymen of
                    the Church of England between 1540 and 1835.” (from website).
                The sources of information for all three projects are surviving manuscript
                    records of many kinds. The central computing tool that all three projects employ
                    is the relational database. Obviously, there is a significant issue involved in
                    taking the textual source material, often presented discursively, and presenting
                    it in the structured form that a database requires. Central, then, to the design
                    of the database, and to the continuing process of putting data into it, is
                    ensuring that the scholarly interpretation essential to this transformation is
                    properly accommodated.
                In traditional Prosopography (see, for example, the well-known Prosopography of the Late Roman Empire, or the more recent Prosopographie der mittelbyzantinischen Zeit—PmbZ(Lille et
                    al 1998-2002)), the central organising principle is the person. The information
                    about the person is formed into an article by the scholar, and the articles
                    themselves are organised by the person’s name. There is often some degree of
                    more structured information attached (in PmbZ, for example, there is, among
                    other lists, a formal list of sources in which information about the person
                    could be gleaned). However, the primary source of information for the user is
                    the article. The article is presented as a narrative in which we find a complex
                    blending of quotation from sources and scholarly interpretation. Some of the
                    assertions are made without further justification, in some cases an argument is
                    provided to support why an assertion has been made, in some cases an issue is
                    left unresolved and only alternatives are outlined. The scholar's task is to
                    take the evidence provided by the sources s/he has read and to represent in the
                    article the shades of certainty about any of them.
                All three of our Prosopographical projects take a radically different
                        approach.Those familiar with the CD publication of PBE I may
                        have observed that the approach taken there was actually a transitional
                        one—somewhere between the article-oriented and factoid-oriented approach
                        described here. The current phase of PBE work has fully taken on the
                        approach described below The final publication will not be a set of
                    volumes containing articles, but an online database. Furthermore, all three
                    projects agree that there will be none or very few articles about persons in
                    their database, and they will be written after the
                    data collection process is complete, rather than being central to it. Instead,
                    the evidence data will be recorded as a series of factoids—assertions made by the project team that a source “S” at
                    location “L” states something (”F”) about person “P”. Factoid was first applied to this kind of information by Dion Smythe
                    and Gorden Gallacher, and is not a statement of fact about a person; it is an
                    assertion that a source says something about him/her. In Figure 1 you can see
                    some sample output from the PBE database, showing factoids derived from the
                    source Skylitzes Continuatus; for Emperor Alexios I
                    Komnenos (identified in the DB as Alexios 001) in 1078. As the illustration
                    suggests, there are several different kinds of factoids provided. In PBE,
                    factoid data is collected for things such as activities or events in which the
                    person took part; physical, spiritual or physiological descriptions applied to
                    them; dignities or offices they held; ethnic group to which they belonged;
                    kinship relationships with other people; locations with which they were
                    associated; occupations they took up; possessions they owned; and religion they
                    professed.
                
                    Figure 1: A Factoid List for Alexios I Komnenos (PBE)
                
                Factoids are modeled as entities in the prosopographical database, and each
                    factoid type contains both an explicit and implicit structure. The explicit
                    structure can be relatively complex. Figure 2 shows the data capture screen
                    displaying one of PASE's event factoids—the event being the tonsoring of Guthlac
                    by Aelfthryth (as recorded in the Vita Sancti
                    Guthlaci). Not only is there a description field that contains
                    information about the act itself (here only the beginning of the full text
                    recorded in the field is visible), but the event is:
                        categorized in the Term field,
                        attached to a place (the place described using the word found in the
                            original text, the type of place it is and its modern day location),
                            and
                        linked to the two people involved, one identified as the recipient and
                            the other as the agent.
                    
                Furthermore,
                        the textual source for the event, and location in the text where the
                            act is recorded is entered in the database, and
                        there is space for recording a scholarly date recording when the event
                            is thought to have occurred, and space to record whatever dating
                            information is given in the source (only partially visible in this
                            figure).
                    
                Finally, there is a place in the “Notes” and “Problems” field where the
                    researcher can record in free text some commentary on the factoid that s/he
                    considers important but does not fit the structured fields associated with the
                    factoid itself.
                
                    Figure 2: An Event Factoid in PASE
                
                There are, in addition, elements of implicit structure that must be recorded in
                    the textual elements—a reference to another person in the database in the
                    description of an event would be an example of this. Textual fields in our
                    projects are, therefore, often structured as mini-XML documents, with XML being
                    used to handle the structure that they contain and making it available for
                    further machine handling.
                A relational database is most useful when the data it contains is highly
                    structured. The capability of the relational model is often underestimated in
                    scholarly circles, and both Greenstein (Greenstein 1994), and Townsend et al (in
                    the AHDS Guides to Good Practice: Digitising History)
                    begin their discussion of databases by acknowledging that a single table in the
                    relational database as often too limited for large scale historical use (it is
                    described as the “matrix straitjacket” in Townsend). Greenstein, however,
                    recognises that the relational aspect of the
                    relational model—which allows material from more than one table to be linked
                    into a single logical entity —allows for richer collections of information to be
                    formed. Once an entry (say, for the Person) in a table is changed from being a
                    text string containing the person’s name to a link to a row in another “person
                    information” table it is possible to record a great deal of richer information
                    about that person. Thus, PBE, PASE and CCE databases contain not only structured
                    data in the form of factoids, but they also contain complex structures spread
                    over more than one table each that represent other important “objects” in the
                    database related to the factoids such as persons, geographic locations and
                    possessions.
                The challenges associated with our Prosopographical databases are many. First,
                    there is a constant struggle to be sure that, for each field one enters, one is
                    clear about to what extent the field represents simply what is in the source,
                    and to what extent it is actually represents a scholarly interpretation of that
                    source. Even the “original source” fields holds text out of context, making it a
                    matter of scholarly decision about exactly what fragment should be
                        included.Linking of our databases to full-text representations
                        of the source texts have been considered by all projects. In all three
                        projects, however, this has been rejected for various reasons. There was no
                        funding to take on the preparation of a fresh electronic edition, and, in
                        general, no scholarly reputable electronic editions of the texts were
                        available elsewhere. PASE might yet explore some options in this area,
                        however, for recording data from charters.
                Furthermore, for all three projects data is collected on a source-by-source basis
                    by more than one researcher. The issue of consistency between researchers is
                    constantly on our minds. Consistency issues are dealt with during the editorial
                    phase of the project, where editors will use tools to assert, for example, that
                    a person A in one source is the same person as person B in another. We expect to
                    have more to say about these issues during our presentation at the
                    conference.
                An article in a traditional prosopography provides a well organised bundle of
                    information to its user in the form of a narrative. What happens when the
                    prosopography contains large collections of factoids instead? As figure I
                    suggests, the factoid model used in these projects provides a way that the
                    machine can generate “micro-narratives”—to use the term presented in (Ramsay
                    2002). These narratives will be richly linked to other data in the system, and
                    different micro-narratives will be generated when one enters from different
                    starting points (say, from a location, rather than from a person), or by
                    traversing links that connect materials in each factoid to the broader database
                    contents. Clearly, a web access mechanism for these databases will need to be
                    significantly more complex than a simple search form which results in a list of
                    selected items. We believe that the best interface to this will provide the
                    blending of a searching and browsing paradigm that is now characteristic of
                    large websites on the WWW. All three projects are now reaching the stages where
                    some detailed exploration of these presentation and selection issues can begin.
                    We will describe some of these issues in more detail during the conference
                    presentation.
                In moving from article-based to factoid-based prosopography, all three of our
                    projects are participating in the development of a radically new approach to the
                    field. The role of the scholar has clearly altered in our projects. In addition
                    to being ultimately responsible for the projects’ “content”, all project members
                    must work together to ensure that new methodologies are developed which ensure
                    both quality and consistency of information across the large number of
                    individual factoids. The role of the scholarly end-user may also have to change,
                    and here too the project has to work to ensure that the experience of the
                    end-user searching through these factoids is positive and useful. In the end, we
                    are finding new ways that technology can serve these essential scholarly
                    goals.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    John
                                    Bradley
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Harold
                                    Short
                                
                            
                            Using Formal Structures to Create Complex
                                Relationships: The Prosopography of the Byzantine Empire—A Case
                                Study
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    K.
                                    S.
                                    B.
                                    Keats-Rohan
                                
                            
                            Only Connect: The Use of Computers in Developing
                                Prosopographical Methodology
                            
                                Oxford
                                Unit for Prosopographical Research, Linacre
                                    College
                                2002
                            
                        
                        Preprint online at 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Clergy of the Church of England
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        at 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    I.
                                    Greenstein
                                
                            
                            A Historian's Guide to Computing
                            
                                Oxford
                                Oxford University Press
                                1994
                                268
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ralph-Johannes
                                    Lille
                                 et al 
                            Prosopographie der mittelbyzantinischen Zeit, Abteilung
                                I: 641-867
                            Prolegomena and volumes I-VI
                            
                                Berlin
                                Walter de Gruyter
                                1998-2002
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        at 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Prosopography of the Byzantine Empire
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                         at 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Stephen
                                    Ramsay
                                
                            
                            Relational Ontologies and the New Historicism
                        
                        
                            in session Pitty Daniel et al. Multiple Architectures and Multiple Media; The Salem Witch
                                    Trials and Boston's Back Bay Fens Projects, at
                            ALLC/ACH conference: July 2002
                            
                                
                                
                                2002
                            
                        
                        Abstract online at 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Dion
                                    C.
                                    Smythe
                                
                            
                            Prosopography of the Byzantine Empire
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Deegan
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Short
                                
                            
                            DRH99: Selected papers from Digital Resources for the
                                Humanities 1999
                            
                                London
                                Office for Humanities Communication
                                2000
                                75-81
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Sean
                                    Townsend
                                 et al 
                            AHDS Guides to Good Practice: Digitising
                                History
                            
                                Oxford
                                Oxbow Books
                                1999
                            
                        
                        Online at .
                    
                
            
        
    
