


    
        
            
                Tagging Time in PROLOG: from quick and dirty to TEI 
                
                    
                        Jan
                        Christoph
                        Meister
                        
                            University of Hamburg 
                            jan-c-meister@uni-hamburg.de
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                This paper presents work in progress from a current research project at Hamburg
                    University that employs Humanities Computing methodology for developing and
                    testing a new theory and model of “narrative time”. Our premise is that
                    narrative time should be defined in functional and not in essential or
                    categorical terms: time is not an objective phenomenon, but a cognitive
                    construct and can thus best be modeled in terms of a 'temporality effect'. This
                    effect -- that is, the impression of temporal order in narrative, both on the
                    level of fictional reality and narrative discourse – is to be explained and
                    analyzed in terms of the distribution of empirical 'notions' (representations of
                    objects) and 'temporal operators' throughout a representational medium, in our
                    case: a narrative text.
                Humanities Computing methodology plays a central role with regard to both the
                    description (markup) and the subsequent combinatory analysis of relevant textual
                    elements. However, adhering to a TEI compliant tagging approach proves
                    unacceptably complicated. The paper therefore argues for a quick and dirty approach to time tagging based on feature structure
                    tags that are defined in the form of PROLOG clauses.
            
            
                THEORY
                To date most theories of narrative—in particular those focusing on the domain of
                    literary narratives—conceptualize of ‘time’ in terms of a dichotomy of narrated time vs. time of
                        narration or, as Günter Müller’s classic formulation goes, of Erzählzeit vs. erzählte
                        Zeit. This is essentially an ontological distinction that attempts to
                    set apart two ‘worlds’, each of with is seen to have its ‘own time’. However,
                    this distinction immediately becomes problematic when dealing with non-fictional
                    representations of events which, irrespective of chronological proximity, are by
                    definition situated on a singular objective time line. Our approach is therefore
                    based not on the traditional narratological concept, but rather on the unitary
                    model of time originally proposed by McTavern who distinguished between two
                        perspectives onto time: namely, that of events
                    in an objective before-after relationship (the
                    so-called B-series of time), and that of events as
                    occurring in the subjective cognitive order of future-present-past (A-series). 
            
            
                COMPUTER-BASED IMPLEMENTATION
                As far as tools are concerned, the implementation of this theoretical model in a
                    Humanities Computing orientated project has necessitated the development of two
                        programs:
                        TempusMarker -- a software tool providing automatic and semi-automatic
                            markup routines for the tagging of temporal expressions in natural
                            language texts. A prototype of TempusMarker has already been
                                programmed.Available for download at . A
                                detailed description of the tool (in German) is
                            included.
                        TempusParser -- an analytical tool that generates a version (or
                            versions, as the case may be) of the base text in which all the
                            sequences that form a complex narrative discourse are organized in
                            strict chronological order. This (re)construction is the result of an
                            algorithm driven process of analysis and recombination of textual
                            segments during which the ‘time stamp’ of each segment as indicated by
                            the temporal tags is interpreted.A schematic representation
                                of the TempusParser architecture and workflow is available at 
                    
                The computational implementation of McTavern’s model for the purpose of concrete
                    analyses of A-series governed textual discourse and its eventual reconstruction
                    in terms of B-series ordered event sequences offers an interesting example for
                    the difficulties faced by the computing Humanist who tries to tackle even
                    modestly ‘intelligent’ hermeneutic problems. In the project to be presented here
                    an added problem stems from its empirical orientation: rather than having
                    experts (Literary Scholars) tag the texts we are using student groups in order
                    to simulate as closely as possible the ‘naïve’ reader’s processing habits. A
                    demonstration of the actual tagging process, including the use of the
                    TempusMarker prototype, will form part of the presentation.
                The computational implementation of McTavern’s model for the purpose of concrete
                    analyses of A-series governed textual discourse and
                    its eventual reconstruction in terms of B-series
                    ordered event sequences offers an interesting example for the difficulties faced
                    by the computing Humanist who tries to tackle even modestly ‘intelligent’
                    hermeneutic problems. In the project to be presented here an added problem stems
                    from its empirical orientation: rather than having experts (Literary Scholars)
                    tag the texts we are using student groups in order to simulate as closely as
                    possible the ‘naïve’ reader’s processing habits. A demonstration of the actual
                    tagging process, including the use of the TempusMarker prototype, will form part
                    of the presentation.
                Whereas the temporal value of the respective natural language expressions -- be
                    they denotative or deictic -- is comparatively easy to establish either
                    contextually, or from a dictionary, their explication in the form of
                    standardized TEI markup (core tag set + additional tag sets for dates and time,
                    ref. chapter 20.4. of TEI guidelines) has proven rather unwieldy and often
                    contra-intuitive to our readers. Defining more readily comprehensible feature structure tags would seem to be the
                    alternative of choice; however, this raises the methodological question of how
                    to design a sufficiently fine-grained feature structure that does not
                    automatically become completely idiosyncratic to the particular research problem
                    at hand, thus inadvertently restricting the uses of the tagged corpus at a later
                    stage.
                Against this background the paper advocates and will demonstrate a calculated
                        quick and dirty approach to designing temporal
                    feature structure tags. In particular, it will be shown how the PROLOG predicate
                    structure can facilitate rapid prototyping of feature structure tags.
            
            
                CONCLUSION
                Expressing relatively complex hermeneutical problems and models in terms of
                    Humanities Computing methodology and standards should be conceived of as a
                    process of translation, rather than one of mere re-presentation. From a
                    hermeneutical point of view semantic tags are not
                    just descriptors, but rather predicates of a prepositional clause in which the
                    tagged string itself is one argument, and its feature values the subsequent
                    arguments. Capturing experimental temporal feature structure tags in the form of
                    PROLOG predicates therefore holds two advantages: first, it offers a more
                    intuitive approach to semantic tagging. Second, it facilitates automatic
                    conversion of feature structures into composite TEI tags at a later stage, thus
                    turning the quick and dirty into the beautifully
                    intricate -- and fast at that.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christopher
                                    Habel
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Frank
                                    Schilder
                                
                            
                            From Temporal Expressions to Temporal Information:
                                Semantic Tagging of News Messages
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        - 27.11.2002
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Günter
                                    Dammann
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jan
                                    Christoph
                                    Meister
                                
                            
                            The temporality effect: Design and computer-based
                                application of a constituent model of narrative temporal
                                order
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        - 27.11.2002
                            (contains hyperlinks to the prototype of the TempusMarker tagging
                            tool.)
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    John
                                    Ellis
                                    McTaggart
                                
                            
                            The Unreality of Time
                        
                        
                            Mind
                            
                                17
                                
                                457-474
                                1908
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Günther
                                    Müller
                                
                            
                            Erzählzeit und erzählte Zeit
                        
                        
                            Festschrift für Paul Kluckhohn und Hermann
                                Schneider
                            
                                Tübingen
                                
                                1948
                                195-212
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                TEI Consortium
                            
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Lou
                                    Burnard
                                
                            
                            TEI P4 - Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
                                Interchange
                            XML-compatible edition
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                        (Chapter 6.4: Names and Dates, and Chapter 20.4: Names, Numbers,
                            Dates, Abbreviations, and Addresses.) 
                    
                
            
        
    
