


    
        
            
                Temporal Modelling
                
                    
                        Johanna
                        Drucker
                        Media Studies, University of Virginia
                            jrd8e@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Bethany
                        Nowviskie
                        SpecLab, University of Virginia
                            bethany@virginia.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Temporal Modelling is an interface designed specifically to meet the needs of
                    humanities scholars wanting to interpret or analyse the subjective experience of
                    temporality in historical documents or imaginative artifacts. Since its
                    inception, Temporal Modelling has had two goals: 1) to provide a responsive
                    interface for visualizing complex temporal relations in humanities data and 2)
                    to experiment with an alternative approach to content modelling in humanities
                    computing. Two years into the project, we think we can demonstrate progress on
                    both fronts. We’ve designed a working prototype suited to humanities scholars
                    that generates XML output concurrent with a user's graphical modelling. Our
                    session describes the interwoven conceptual and technical development of this
                    project (research, visual design development, conceptualization process, and
                    prototype production), and also aims to make it known to a community who we hope
                    will be among its primary users and first adopters.
                Temporal Modelling demonstrates an alternative approach to content modelling for
                    humanities computing. In the usual sequence of humanities computing events, a
                    content model is developed and then used to create a richly marked data set.
                    Visualizations or graphical displays follow as a result, not as a point of
                    input. By contrast, we’ve created a tool that allows visualization to act as a
                    procedure, not an outcome, of interpretation. Graphical sketching integrates
                    interpretation into digitization concretely, creating a content model.
                Temporal Modelling consists of two parts. The first we call a composition space
                    or PlaySpace: an interface with a set of visual, graphical elements for making
                    models of temporal relations. The mechanisms and processes of the composition
                    space focus on: the positioning of temporal objects (such as events, intervals,
                    and points in time) on the axis of a timeline; the labelling of those objects
                    using text, color, size, and quality; the relation of objects to specific
                    temporal granularities (the standards by which we mark hours, seasons, aeons);
                    and, in complex interaction, the relation of objects to each other. These can be
                    further modified by a process we call “inflection”—the assignment of attributes
                    with either semantic or syntactic values. For example, a humanities scholar
                    attempting to chart a sequence of events traced in family letters, in which many
                    temporal events are referenced relationally, rather than by date, could use such
                    a system in a preliminary stage of analysis, creating a visual scheme to
                    represent events or references. In addition, however, Temporal Modelling
                    contains tools of interpretation and analysis to characterize events through
                    such inflections as anticipation, regret, foreshadowing or causality.
                A user’s interpretation is captured and formalized into a structured data scheme
                    that develops concurrently, as the visualization proceeds. User gestures and
                    image renderings are translated into an XML schema which can be exported, used
                    to design a DTD, or transformed through use of XSLT or other manipulations. In
                    the second part of our project, a complementary DisplaySpace will use the same
                    graphical elements to display “published” models from the PlaySpace, as well as
                    supporting display from imported structured data. DisplaySpace models can be
                    manipulated for contrast and comparison in their “published” form or reloaded
                    into the PlaySpace for further refinement. The composition space enables
                    understanding through iterative visual construction in an editing environment
                    that implies infinite visual breadth and depth. In contrast, the display space
                    channels energy into iterative visual reflection by providing a responsive,
                    richly-layered surface in which subjectivity and inflection in temporal
                    relations are not fashioned but may be reconfigured.
                The objects, actions, and relations defined by our schemata and programming are
                    not married inextricably with specific graphics and on-screen animations or
                    display modes. Just as we have provided tools for captioning and coloring (and
                    the ability to regularize custom-made systems with legends and labels), we have
                    also made possible the upload and substitution of user-made standard vector
                    (SVG) graphics for the generic notation systems we've devised. This is more than
                    mere window-dressing. Our intense methodological emphasis on the importance of
                    visual understanding allows the substitution of a single set of graphics
                    (representing inflections for, say, mood or foreshadowing) to alter radically
                    the statements made possible by Temporal Modelling’s loose grammar. Users are
                    invited to intervene in the interpretive processes enabled by our tool almost at
                    its root level.
                Temporal Modelling can be used to model date-stamped, or empirical data, but its
                    strength is in its ability to structure the representation of subjective
                    experience. Several of the design features of our project embody this
                    conviction, most notably the “now slider”. This element embeds an individual
                    point of view (or several, depending on the project) into the graphical model
                    and allows the interpretation to be played forward or backward (“progressed” or
                    “regressed”). The model of events changes depending on the position of these
                    individual now-sliders. An event once anticipated may give rise to an unforeseen
                    set of outcomes and be transformed into an interval charged with regret or
                    melancholy. Temporal Modelling attempts to embody the subjectivity of an
                    interpretation, not merely depict a subjective approach.
                Our initial conceptualization was informed by reading across a range of
                    disciplines and fields. We were interested in a historical, trans-cultural
                    inventory of ways time and temporality have been conceptualized. We grounded our
                    fundamental distinction between time as an a priori category and temporality as
                    a relational conception. Our readings were drawn from logic, religion,
                    anthropology, and philosophy, as well other humanities and social sciences (see
                    References). In addition, we made an inventory of visualizations for showing and
                    analyzing data that have a temporal dimension (). Because we are intent on
                    creating both a composition space and a display space that can utilize the same
                    set of visual elements, we wanted to consider conventions for presenting
                    date-stamped information while concentrating our design on a system suited to
                    humanities documents whose temporal references and/or relations do not conform
                    to empirical models.
                After this research survey, we created a basic conceptual schema for designing
                    the Temporal Modelling project. This involved several steps 1) defining temporal
                    primitives (entities, actions, and relations); 2) developing a graphical
                    vocabulary for their presentation; 3) developing a labelling and annotation
                    system that allows for customization by individual users. Our assertion is that
                    representations based on empirical approaches assume an objective, homogeneous,
                    continuous, and uni-directional notion of time. We wanted to design a system
                    grounded in subjective, heterogeneous, dis-continuous, and multi-directional
                    temporalities. To accomplish this, we conceived of a number of unique design
                    features in addition to the now slider. These include “stretchy” timelines with
                    variable scales and granularities, branching and alternative narratives of
                    temporal events according to catastrophic (event-driven) and continuous
                    (unfolding) models. Designs for ruptured and discontinuous time are also in the
                    plans. The technical implementation of this design involved creating a tightly
                    integrated relation between visualization and digitization of information. In
                    addition, at each instance, the design of specific elements raises interesting
                    intellectual problems at the intersection of philosophical and computational
                    concerns—for instance, is “regret” a semantic attribute of an event, or a
                    syntactic one, engaged in relational effects? Such issues are central to the
                    intellectual and programming structure of this project.
                Temporal Modelling is an experiment in using speculative methods— approaches to
                    conceptualization and design of computational tools or projects with uncertain
                    outcomes. The Speculative Computing Lab at the University of Virginia defines
                    its mission as undertaking projects that have a risk of failure. These projects
                    are not necessarily grounded in discipline-specific research and have a
                    tool-based and interpretive aim rather than a collections or archive development
                    goal. Speculative projects are motivated by the desire to foreground these
                    interpretive practices, particularly the subjective practices that are central
                    to traditional humanities. Temporal Modelling is an Intel-sponsored project of
                    the Speculative Computing Lab in the Media Studies Program at the University of
                    Virginia.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    F.
                                    Allen
                                
                            
                            Time and Time Again: The Many Ways to Represent
                                Time
                        
                        
                             International Journal of Intelligent Systems
                            
                                6
                                4
                                341-355
                                July 1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                    J.
                                    Burg
                                , et al
                            Using Constraint Logic Programming to Analyze the
                                Chronology in A Rose for Emily
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                34
                                4
                                377-392
                                December 2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    T.
                                    Fraser
                                
                            
                            Time, The Familiar Stranger
                            
                                
                                Massachusetts UP
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                    C.
                                    S.
                                    Jensen
                                et al
                            A Glossary of Temporal Database Concepts
                        
                        
                             Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
                                Management of Data 23, 1, March, 1994
                            
                                
                                
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    W.
                                    Jordan
                                
                            
                             Determining the Temporal Ordering of Events in
                                Discourse.
                        
                        
                             Unpublished masters thesis for
                            
                                Carnegie Mellon Computational Linguistics
                                    Program
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Price
                                
                            
                            The View from Nowhen
                        
                        
                            Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point.
                            
                                New York
                                Oxford UP
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Teri
                                    Reynolds
                                
                            
                            Spacetime and Imagetext
                        
                        
                            Germanic Review
                            
                                73
                                2
                                161–74
                                Spring 1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    F.
                                    A.
                                    Schreiber
                                
                            
                            Is Time a Real Time? An Overview of Time Ontology in
                                Informatics
                        
                        
                            Real Time Computing
                            
                                
                                
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Steedman
                                
                            
                            The Productions of Time
                        
                        
                            draft tutorial notes 2.0: University of
                                Edinburgh
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
