


    
        
            
                Teaching literature through the net: an answer to the
                    caos or the construction of the self
                
                    
                        Laura
                        Borràs
                        
                            Universitat Oberta de Catalunya
                            lborras@uoc.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Joan-Elies
                        Adell
                        
                            Universitat Oberta de Catalunya
                            jadellp@uoc.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Isabel
                        Moll
                        
                            Universitat Oberta de Catalunya
                            imoll@uoc.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    INTRODUCTION. UNIVERSITAT OBERTA DE CATALUNYA: THE FIRST VIRTUAL
                        UNIVERSITY IN THE WORLD
                    In 1995, the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (UOC) was conceived as the first
                        e-learning university in the world. This new concept of university redefined
                        the idea of teaching, studying and doing research. There has been an
                        evolution within the UOC since new technologies have developed and have
                        become so usual for our everyday life. There has been as well an important
                        feedback between students and lecturers and this has obviously contributed
                        to find our best way to teach Humanities and Philology in this environment,
                        which has been so often considered hostile for these areas of knowledge. In
                        this paper, we would like to focus on the challenging experience of teaching
                        literature through the net and we will present all the questions we (the
                        lecturers) have had to rise in order to present an effective method of
                        teaching literature in the broad sense of both words: teaching and
                        literature.
                
                
                    FROM THE AESTHETICS OF RECEPTION TO THE AESTHETICS OF INTERACTIVITY
                    The incorporation of new technologies to literature and to the study of
                        literature has allowed to reread the past from a platform in which the
                        literary work is more than ever an open device, with no hierarchical
                        structures, and belonging to an infinite net of hypertexts. We can rethink
                        the literary phenomenon from other textual, critical and hermeneutical
                        perspective. Digital environement clearly shows the inscription of a
                        literary work in an intertextual framework and allows physical connection of
                        texts. Moreover, digital context reformulates higher education, following a
                        process which begins with the invention of writing, and continues wiht the
                        press, and that frees the student from physically attending to the lectures
                        (Landow, 1997: 29-30). In the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (), since 1995, this process is taking place
                        in a concrete place in the net: the virtual campus, that works
                        asincronically, serving to the students and professors comunity. And even in
                        this heterogeneous and disturbing medium, the final purpose is still
                        "teaching". However, when the environment is not the "clasroom" anymore, but
                        the virtuality of a computer screen, the methodological approach is crucial
                        and demands a previous reflection: at the begining of the 21st century,
                        should we continue to offer the same teaching patterns as we have been doing
                        for many decades? In our opinion, this question applies not only to a
                        pioneer university such as the UOC, but also to more traditional
                        universities. Cultural and social changes that Internet has provoked and the
                        information society in which we are living now compels us to reflect on some
                        premises and to consider new ways and different possibilities in tune with
                        the new era. In the context of overinformation surrounding us, professors"
                        duty can not be anymore the transmission of knowledge, but the contribution
                        to the generation of this knowlegde, that is to say, s/he has to assume a
                        role of "guide" and should provide the necessary intellectual tools that
                        will allow students to be able to think critically.
                    Focusing on literary studies, our mission is basically teaching to read, but
                        giving to this formula all the depth we are able to. In the Humanities and
                        Philology Studies in the UOC, we have chosen an hermeneutical approach,
                        following Gadamer, whose idea of Hermeneutics is the art of understanding
                        the other"s opinion. For us, this constitutes a redoubtable reflection on
                        the activity of reading, which aspires to participate in the "shared sense".
                        Nevertheless, reading and teaching to read in a medium like Internet and
                        with its natural tool, this is hypertext, means to confront a technological
                        device serving education. Taking as an example the subject "Temes de
                        literatura universal" ("Universal literary topics"), we will try to outline
                        which are the changes that affect literature teaching. We consider that this
                        constitutes an initial step in order to establish which are the real
                        possibilities that allow us to progress, from a theoretical point of view,
                        from the aesthetics of reception to the aesthetics of interactivity. This
                        will provoke a voice game in the virtual classroom not only between
                        professor and students, but also between students themselves, and therefore
                        there will be a collective and dialogical creation of knowledge.
                    We have organized this subject taking as a starting point a series of texts
                        connected by the fact that they deal with some of the basic topics of
                        universal literature. In the hipertextual material, which combines linear
                        reading with sequential or fragmentary reading inherent to hypertext, as
                        well as video or audio resources, what we offer are interpretations and
                        readings of key literary works through a double intertextual route. That is
                        to say in a genetical and analogical way, and that relates different
                        literary, pictorial or cinematographic texts. During all this process, we
                        have had the intention of analyse the text from a double perspective, both
                        towards the present and the future but, at the same time, it appears within
                        a pardigm formed by other texts, that precede and influence it. Therefore,
                        the texts assums in a explicit or implicit way the cultural past which comes
                        before, even when it has been conceived against this past. The course
                        intends to contribute to a tranversal reading of universal literature in a
                        virtual environment of learning, and at the same time it provides guide
                        lines to students for a practical exercise of compartive literature. It
                        suggests as well reading itineraries crossing periods and literary
                        traditions which are far from each other in time and space. Following
                        intertextual connections (in an analogical and genetical way), that are
                        guiding us inside the hyprtextual corpus, some reading routes are described
                        as random and subjective and they show the broadcast and the arituclation of
                        such a topic in the literary tradition. Students, after familiarizing with
                        the texts presented in the materials and wiht the navigating tools offered
                        by the materials, have to select the topics that are subjectively more
                        relevant, and to build up their own (hyper)textual corpus. Professor R.
                        Pinto, who is one of the lecturers of the subject, asserts that both during
                        the first part of the course, more receptive, and during the second one,
                        more active, there is always a dialogue between the professor and the
                        students.
                
                
                    TEACHING LITERATURE THROUGH THE NET: TO READ AND TO REREAD
                    "A good reader is a rereader", says categorically Nabokov. The power of this
                        assertion proves that the hypertextual space, in which the reading is
                        fragmentary and non-sequential, the act of rereading is the best
                        methodological strategy for building up a sense. Hypertext allows an
                        exponential rereading of the contents we have designed. Moreover, hypertext
                        is, without any doubts, an essential tool for on-line literary theory and
                        comparative literature teaching. Therefore, it is necessary to seriously
                        consider the fact of teaching in a virtual context, with these digital
                        materials, in a multiple textual environment, without boundaries, or with
                        the sole boundaries of curiosity and desire. And the use of the World Wide
                        Web, that implies getting rid of the acquired habits and changing the
                        comunication techniques of knwoledge discourse. The ways of proving the
                        "validity" of a literary analysis are being modified since we can deveolp
                        discourse following a logic that is not necessarily linear and deductive,
                        but open and relational. In this sense, after the accumulated experience and
                        taking into account the results obtained from our own strategical and
                        creative versions, the conclusion is that the revolution of production
                        patterns, tranmission and inquiry of the texts can be included in
                        hypertextuality as an epistemological mutation.
                
                
                    UNESTABLENESS? CAOS? TOWARDS THE COLLECTIVE CONSTRUCTION OF
                        KNOWLEDGE
                    We have to add that the extreme fluidity of hypertext oblige us to rethink
                        one of the main preoccupations of who is writing: the possibility of
                        exerting a control over the way of the reader"s reading. Indeed the
                        author-professor creative act requires an interpretative act of the
                        user-student and requires as well a wander around the text. Hypertext shows
                        a new form of "textuality" based on the capacity of "penetration" of a text
                        marked with all the links that open doors to new sense horizons. In
                        hypertexts, any illusion of control vanishes: seduction is the only
                        motivation towards an hypertextual wander. We lose the notion of control
                        because hypertext itself undervalues it. If knowledge spreads itself
                        provoking an infinite virtuality of intertextual connections, that represent
                        the inifite ways of the discoursive configuration of the self (Pinto, 2002:
                        175), everything is relevant, everything could be interconnected. Our own
                        proposal for this subject, was, therefore, to promote a digital working
                        environment that made evident the literary work in a more physical way,
                        completely textual, and that allowed interaction, interrelation and link.
                        This personal use of phylology, defined by Pinto as more attentive to the
                        subject who interprets and to the questions that constitute him/herself than
                        to the interpreted text and to its objective historical reality, can be
                        considered as a copernican revolution of literary criticism, promoted by new
                        technologies.
                
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    George
                                    P.
                                    Landow
                                
                            
                            Teoría del hipertexto
                            
                                Barcelona
                                Paidós
                                1994
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Raffaele
                                    Pinto
                                
                            
                            Crítica literaria y construcción del sujeto. Dos
                                modelos de autoanálisis: Sigmund Freud (psicopatología de la vida
                                cotidiana) e Italo Calvino (seis propuestas para el próximo
                                milenio)
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Laura
                                    Borràs
                                
                            
                            Deseo, construcción y personaje
                            
                                Madrid,
                                Fundación Autor
                                2002
                                173-193
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
