


    
        
            
                New Technologies, New Strategies for Integrating
                    Information and Knowledge: Forced Migration Online
                
                    
                        Marilyn
                        Deegan
                        
                            University of Oxford
                            marilyn.deegan@qeh.ox.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Harold
                        Short
                        
                            King's College London
                            harold.short@kcl.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    The first ten years of the web have largely represented a triumph of
                        interconnectedness over functionality: in the late nineteen eighties and
                        early nineteen nineties information resources and teaching tools were being
                        developed that were highly sophisticated and interactive. The web, for all
                        its benefits of connectivity, actually resulted in a massive downturn in
                        functionality, and we are only now able to recover some of those functions
                        with newer developments. A paradigm example of this loss of functionality is
                        in the Oxford English Dictionary: the first version
                        of this, released in the late 1980s, with a DOS interface, represented a
                        revolution in data access. Version 2, released in 1992 with a Windows
                        interface added little in terms of functionality, but a great deal in terms
                        of access. However, OED Online, released in 1999, gave connectivity and
                        wider access at the cost of a huge loss of the functions that many users had
                        come to rely upon—so much so that many users have never made the transition
                        from CD. This is by no means the fault of the developers, but is a
                        consequence of the platform that we are all now using.
                    New resources are now being developed for data access and retrieval that take
                        full advantage of the benefits of interconnectedness, while giving us
                        enhanced functionality and also allowing us to integrate complex
                        technologies into an apparently seamless whole. This paper will discuss the
                        development of an advanced Internet resource, Forced Migration Online () that was launched in November
                        2002.
                
                
                    THE STUDY OF FORCED MIGRATION
                    Forced migration is defined by the International Association for the Study of
                        Forced Migration as ‘a general term that refers to the movements of refugees
                        and internally displaced people (those displaced by conflicts) as well as
                        people displaced by natural or environmental disasters, chemical or nuclear
                        disasters, famine, or development projects’. Forced migration studies are
                        essentially interdisciplinary, drawing from anthropology, history, politics,
                        international law, sociology, psychology, and many other disciplines in the
                        humanities and social sciences. The documentary base of the subject has
                        grown rapidly over the last twenty years, and scholars and practitioners in
                        the field rely for their information and studies upon a diverse body of
                        work: conventional books and journals, but also largely ‘grey’ (unpublished
                        or semi-published) literature. This grey literature can be difficult to get
                        hold of, as it derives from so many different sources: government agencies,
                        non-governmental organizations, academic sources, etc.
                
                
                    THE DEVELOPMENT OF FORCED MIGRATION ONLINE
                    The development of Forced Migration Online (FMO) began in 1997 at the Refugee
                        Studies Centre (RSC) at the University of Oxford. The RSC has the world’s
                        largest collection of grey literature on forced migration (some 15,000
                        items) and the Andrew W Mellon Foundation granted funding for a portion of
                        this to be digitized. In 2000, the Mellon Foundation and the European Union
                        gave further funding for the development of an integrated portal to be
                        developed on forced migration. The project to develop this portal has been
                        led by the RSC, but with technical and content partners from around the
                        world: the FMO team coordinates participants in some 10 institutions and is
                        working with many more than this to develop content further. FMO now
                        contains 100,000 pages of fully searchable grey literature, 30,000 pages of
                        full-text journal materials, a number of specially-commissioned research
                        guides, a web catalogue with c. 700 entries, an organizations database with
                        c. 800 records, and a prototype image database.
                
                
                    CREATING INFORMATION ARCHITECTURES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF FMO
                    As anyone engaged in the development of digital libraries and portals knows
                        only too well, there is no one obvious tool or technology to implement such
                        complex information resources, though many are currently in development. In
                        FMO, there are a number of different technologies underlying the resource: a
                        complexity which is well hidden from the user, for whom access is relatively
                        simple. The full-text documents are presented using Olive Software’s Active
                        Paper Archive, which was originally developed for presentation of historic
                        newspaper content on the web, and which has proved an excellent choice for
                        the grey literature and journals. FMO is the first project that has used
                        this product in this way, and the development was a joint research project
                        between the FMO technical teams at the RSC and at the Centre for Computing
                        in the Humanities at King’s College London (CCH), and Olive Software. The
                        structured information resources and catalogues are delivered using Esprit
                        Soutron’s xdirectory content management system, and various research guides
                        and other documents are created and presented by means of XML/XSLT.
                    The core challenge is one of integration: integration of a wide variety of
                        information types, drawn from geographically separated repositories capable
                        of providing widely disparate levels of metadata; integration of materials
                        in numerous languages in a variety of scripts; integration of the multiple
                        technologies required to meet the differing information processing and
                        delivery functions; integration of academic analysis and advice for
                        practitioners, and of information and knowledge, to meet widely varying user
                        requirements.
                    Delivering a coherent and integrated resource in a seamless way is a
                        non-trivial technical challenge. It involves visual design, architectural
                        design, development of DTDs and style sheets, and the implementation of
                        leading edge (and therefore constantly evolving) products. Managing the
                        input from so many people and places around the world represents another
                        layer of challenge.
                    This paper assesses the problems of developing and integrating these complex
                        technologies into a hybrid information environment, in particular looking a
                        metadata, cataloguing, preservation, delivery and accessibility issues. It
                        reports on the solutions and partial solutions developed so far, and
                        assesses the extent to which the solutions fall short of the ideal. It also
                        discusses a range of further challenges that the FMO team is now tackling:
                        automatic metadata extraction from journal cross-searching tools for
                        different products using advanced APIs; using focused crawlers as aids to
                        cataloguing; automatic categorization of documents for the creation of
                        regional and topical browse sets. The progress in meeting these challenges
                        will be discussed in the context of the more established work in the
                        project.
                    The paper also places the project in a wider context: of past and current
                        work in the development and delivery of scholarly resources, including a
                        number of projects at IATH in Virginia, in CCH at King's College London, and
                        elsewhere; and of digital library research and development, including
                        projects such as the ‘hybrid library’ projects funded by the UK government
                        (including the Malibu project), the DSpace initiative of MIT and others, and
                        the Mellon-funded FEDORA project based at Virginia and Cornell.
                
            
        
    
