


    
        
            
                Visual or Verbal: Two Approaches to Creating an
                    Immersive Virtual Environment
                
                    
                        Eunice
                        Johnston
                        
                            North Dakota State University
                            eunice.johnston@ndsu.nodak.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jeffrey
                        T.
                        Clark
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Brian
                        M.
                        Slator
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Gary
                        K.
                        Clambey
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Aaron
                        Bergstrom
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Shawn
                        Fisher
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Justin
                        Hawley
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        James
                        E.
                        LandrumIII
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        David
                        Martinson
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        J.
                        Liessman
                        Vantine
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                         
                         
                        
                             
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                One benefit of the development of Immersive Virtual Environments (IVEs) for
                    education is that students in the humanities may now encounter and learn about
                    places and cultures that which are difficult to visit or may no longer exist. As
                    increasingly sophisticated graphical interfaces have become possible, many IVEs
                    have decided to use this technology. Yet some might question whether the highest
                    fidelity interface is always necessary or even desirable for the study of the
                    humanities. This project seeks to answer that question by developing two
                    parallel versions of an IVE that represents the Like-a-Fishhook Village and Fort
                    Berthold area in western North Dakota as they existed in 1858, when people lived
                    there, and in 1954, when it was being excavated. Both versions will permit users
                    to explore the environment freely, but one version creates a complete,
                    three-dimensional visual representation while the other is constructed mostly of
                    text with a few carefully chosen images and sounds.
                To understand the story Like-a-Fishhook Village, the last great earth-lodge
                    village in the Great Plains, and Fort Berthold, the nearby fur trading post, is
                    to understand the history of west. The Mandans, who had befriended Lewis and
                    Clark and the Corps of Discovery in 1804–04, and their close neighbors, the
                    Hidatsas and Arikaras, had lived in sedentary earth-lodge communities along the
                    Missouri River for centuries, hunting, raising corn and other crops, and trading
                    extensively with neighboring tribes. Despite a basic similarity of economic and
                    social life, these peoples differed remarkably in language and customs. The
                    unification of these three tribes at Like-a-Fishhook village tells of the
                    significant impact that the coming of European American people had upon Native
                    American cultures. Although they had suffered several epidemics previously, a
                    smallpox epidemic in 1837 reduced the Mandan population to fewer than 200
                    individuals. The Hidatsa and Arikara populations, although not as severely
                    struck, shrank as well. Ethnohistorical evidence suggests that the first
                    permanent residents of Like-a-Fishhook Village were Hidatsa who arrived in 1845,
                    and that they were joined shortly thereafter by a smaller group of Mandans; the
                    two tribes felt it was beneficial to combine their numbers in order to resist
                    the attacks by Sioux tribes in the area. Although living together, each tribe
                    maintained its own language and culture. P. Chouteau, Jr. and Company, an
                    offshoot of the American Fur Company, quickly established a trading post north
                    of the village, and European Americans were part of the community from then on.
                    Many changes occurred in the next forty years. The fur traders were followed by
                    missionaries, United States government representatives, and soldiers, all people
                    who wanted the natives to change their ways. Fur trading resulted in increased
                    competition for natural resources, which caused more friction than usual among
                    the tribes, and the Arikara, hoping for support in the battles against the
                    Sioux, joined the other two tribes at the village in early 1860s. In the mid
                    1880s, the United States government forced the residents to abandon their
                    village life and to take up individual allotments scattered throughout the
                    reservation.
                Archeological salvage excavations were carried out at the site in 1950–52 and in
                    1954 by the State Historical Society of North Dakota, under contracts with the
                    National Park Service and by the River Basin Surveys of the Smithsonian.
                    However, the rising waters from the Garrison Dam and Reservoir project
                    ultimately inundated the site, which now rests about a mile offshore under the
                    waters of Lake Sakakawea (Garrison Reservoir). Although many individuals were
                    involved in that work, the final report was written by G. Hubert Smith and
                    published by the U.S. Department of the Interior (Smith, 1972).
                A multidisciplinary team is creating two parallel IVEs based on the same content:
                    both recreate the village site as it appeared in 1954, when it was being
                    excavated, and also in 1858, when it was occupied, and visitors will be able to
                    “time travel” from one period to the other. The 3-D, graphically rich version is
                    modeled on other IVEs that have been created at NDSU for students to learn to do
                    science by conducting simulated experiments and solving authentic (albeit
                    virtual) problems. Science-based systems of this sort have demonstrated
                    statistically significant impact on student learning in controlled studies
                    (McClean et al., 2001). The great strength of this version is the visual stimuli
                    including an environment that visually depicts all space and creates the sense
                    of moving through that space. In addition, novice users will probably find it
                    easier to learn how to interact with this IVE. The largely text-based version
                    uses the enCore Xpress MOO interface, and while it does allow the inclusion of
                    some visual and audio components, it requires students to use written language
                    to interact with the virtual environment. The MOO be better able to create
                    multiple perspectives of the multiple cultures represented in the site. In
                    addition, students will, after a process that involves review by scholars and
                    others, be able to enrich the MOO with their own writing, to become producers as
                    well as consumers of content. The MOO version is platform independent and
                    requires less bandwidth than the 3-D graphically rich version. Both types of
                    interfaces have the ability to engage users in the environment, but the question
                    is whether one or the other is more effective for certain types of learning.
                The 3-D graphically rich version of the Like-a-Fishhook IVE will be used by
                    archeology students to learn to think like archeologists. However, both versions
                    will be used by a multidisciplinary, writing-intensive humanities class, which
                    will include students from Fort Berthold Community College, descendents of the
                    village inhabitants. Students will experience the site via the IVEs: they will
                    observe, analyze, reflect-and write-about the area, the cultural changes, the
                    history, and the virtual environments themselves. Students from all disciplines
                    will meet together (at least in virtual space) and discuss the conventions of
                    their disciplines. Then they will explore the IVEs together with a set of
                    questions that require exploration and investigation in order to find the
                    answers. They will also write parallel assignments that are appropriate for
                    their disciplines. For example, all students will keep journals to record their
                    visits to the IVEs, journals that stress purposeful observation and inquiry, but
                    each will concentrate on recording the type of information suitable for his or
                    her discipline as they travel through the IVEs. The journals will be used as the
                    basis for other writing assignments. For example, all students might write about
                    an artifact found during the excavation, but the anthropology student might
                    write an analysis of its cultural significance, the creative writing student a
                    poem or a piece of creative non-fiction about it, and the public history student
                    a museum script for it. Longer papers will require additional research using
                    conventional sources as well as more innovative ones like the Digital Archive
                    Network for Anthropology (DANA) being developed at NDSU and which includes 3-D
                    scans of actual objects found at the Like-a-Fishhook site. The creative writer
                    might write a piece of historical fiction, the anthropology student a scholarly
                    article on some aspect of the cultures depicted in the IVEs, and the public
                    history student a brochure for the site such as the ones that are produced for
                    visitors to actual historic sites. Students from all disciplines might
                    collaborate on the making of a short documentary on some aspect of the area or a
                    multi-vocal web essay that combines the expertise and perspective of several
                    disciplines. After a process of review, student writing can be incorporated into
                    the MOO version to enrich it for future visitors.
                The value of each IVE as it relates to the learning in the humanities will be
                    assessed in several ways. The journals kept by the students during their visits
                    to the IVEs will be assessed to determine (1) the level of engagement in each
                    version of the IVE, (2) any differences they note about the different
                    experiences in the IVEs, (3) the type of information they notice in each IVE,
                    and (4) how well they understand the time periods, the cultures, and the places
                    they are observing. In addition, students will complete surveys that ask them to
                    respond to questions that solicit similar information. These results will
                    provide useful information about the strengths and weaknesses of both types of
                    interfaces.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jeffrey
                                    T.
                                    Clark
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Brian
                                    M.
                                    Slator
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Aaron
                                    Bergstrom
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Francis
                                    Larson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Richard
                                    Frovarp
                                
                            
                            
                                James
                                    E.LandrumIII
                            
                            
                                
                                    William
                                    Perrizo
                                
                            
                            Preservation and Access of Cultural Heritage Objects
                                Through a Digital Archive Network for Anthropology
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
                                Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM-2001), Berkeley, CA, Oct.
                                25–27
                            
                                
                                
                                2001b
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Cynthia
                                    Haynes
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jan
                                    Rune
                                    Holmevik
                                
                            
                            High Wired: On the Design, Use, and Theory of
                                Educational MOOs
                            
                                
                                University of Michigan
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Phillip
                                    McClean
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Bernhardt
                                    Saini-Eidukat
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Donald
                                    P.
                                    Schwert
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Brian
                                    M.
                                    Slator
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Alan
                                    White
                                
                            
                            Virtual Worlds in Large Enrollment Biology and Geology
                                Classes Significantly Improve Authentic Learning
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jack
                                    A.
                                    Chambers
                                
                            
                            Selected Papers from the 12th International Conference
                                on College Teaching and Learning (ICCTL-01), April 17-21,
                                2001
                            
                                Jackson, FL
                                Center for the Advancement of Teaching and
                                    Learning
                                2001
                                111-118
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Brian
                                    M.
                                    Slator
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jeffrey
                                    T.
                                    Clark
                                
                            
                            
                                James
                                    LandrumIII
                            
                            
                                
                                    Aaron
                                    Bergstrom
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Justin
                                    Hawley
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Eunice
                                    Johnston
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Shawn
                                    Fisher
                                
                            
                            Teaching with Immersive Virtual Archaeology
                        
                        
                            Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
                                Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM-2001), Berkley, CA, Oct. 25-27,
                                2001
                            
                                Berkley, CA
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    Hubert
                                    Smith
                                
                            
                            Like-a-Fishhook Village and Fort Berthold, Garrison
                                Reservoir, North Dakota
                            Anthropological Papers 2
                            
                                Washington, D.C.
                                National Park Service. U.S. Department of the
                                    Interior
                                1972
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
