


    
        
            
                Cluster Analysis of the Newcastle Electronic Corpus of
                    Tyneside English: A comparison of Methods
                
                    
                        Herbert
                        Moisl
                        
                            University of Newcastle
                            hermann.moisl@ncl.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Val
                        Jones
                        
                            University of Twente
                            jones@cs.utwente.nl
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    The Newcastle Electronic Corpus of Tyneside English (NECTE) project is based
                        on two separate corpora of recorded speech, one of them collected in the
                        late 1960s as part of the Tyneside Linguistic Survey (TLS), and the other in
                        1994 by the Phonological Variation and Change in Contemporary Spoken English
                        (PVC) project. Its aim is to combine the TLS and the PVC collections into a
                        single corpus and to make it available to the research community in a
                        variety of formats: digitized sound, phonetic transcription, and standard
                        orthographic transcription, all aligned and available on the Web.
                    We are currently developing a methodology to study NECTE from a
                        sociolinguistic point of view, and have begun by looking at the one
                        formulated by the TLS, which was radical at the time and remains so today:
                        in contrast to the then-universal and even now dominant theory-driven
                        approach, where social and linguistic factors are selected by the analyst on
                        the basis of a predefined model, the TLS proposed a fundamentally empirical
                        approach in which salient factors are extracted from the data itself and
                        then serve as the basis for model construction. To this end, an electronic
                        corpus was created from a subset of the data, and various cluster analysis
                        algorithms were applied to it in order to derive social and linguistic
                        classifications of the sample. Stability of classifications across different
                        clustering methods was already a known theoretical problem. The clustering
                        techniques available at the time, and still widely used today, are sensitive
                        to factors such as vector distance measure, clustering algorithm, and the
                        order in which data items are presented —different combinations of these
                        factors typically yield different analyses of the same dataset. These
                        effects were observed in the TLS classifications. In an experiment on
                        artificial data sets Jones (1979) demonstrated that certain combinations of
                        clustering algorithms are capable of imposing erroneous structure on data
                        which was inherently unclassifiable (by design). The types of structurings
                        derived were consistent with theory and observation; for example Ward’s
                        method tended to ‘discover’ spherical clusters irrespective of the natural
                        structure of the data and classifications were shown to be sensitive to
                        input order of datapoints. These properties of clustering techniques raise
                        at least two issues relating to validation of classifications:
                            objectivity—to what extent does a given analysis represent the
                                actual structure of the data, and to what extent is it an artefact
                                of the clustering method?
                            selection—upon what criteria does one choose among alternative
                                analyses?
                        
                    We seek an approach to classification which improves on the methods available
                        at the time when the first analyses of the TLS data were conducted, that is,
                        techniques as insensitive as possible to variation in the sort of parameters
                        identified above. In this paper we consider as a candidate a method that had
                        not been invented when the TLS was active —the self-organizing map (SOM).
                        The discussion is in three main parts. The first part outlines the TLS
                        methodology, the second describes self-organizing maps, and the third
                        compares the consistency of the analytical methods used by the TLS with that
                        of the SOM relative to the TLS phonetic data.
                
                
                    TLS METHODOLOGY
                    The TLS aimed to model the overall linguistic variability of an urban
                        community, that of Tyneside in north-east England, and more
                            specifically
                            to identify and exhaustively characterise the varieties of speech
                                which co-occur in that area, and
                            to determine the distribution of both the speech varieties and
                                their constituent elements across the relevant social
                                subgroups
                        
                    To achieve this aim, a methodology was proposed which differed fundamentally
                        from the one standard at the time, and which was taken to have important
                        theoretical and practical consequences for the discipline of
                        sociolinguistics. In place of the theory-driven approach which characterized
                        the work of Labov and Trudgill, among others, in which a sociolinguistic
                        model was defined and then used to select a relatively small number of
                        social and linguistic variables for analysis, the TLS was conceived as a set
                        of methods whereby the salient features of linguistic and social diversity
                        were to be empirically determined by, rather than presupposed in, the model.
                        This methodology was designed to generate multiple candidate hypotheses
                        about the data by applying high-dimensional multivariate analysis methods to
                        it in different ways, from which those most useful to the aims of the TLS
                        could be selected.
                
                
                    SELF-ORGANIZING MAPS
                    The self-organizing map, also known as the Kohonen net after its inventor, is
                        a k-dimensional surface of processing units, where k is usually 2, together
                        with a buffer into which input vectors are loaded. Associated with each unit
                        is a set of connections from the input buffer such that, for a buffer of
                        length n, there are n connections per unit, and each connection can take on
                        a real-number value or ‘strength’ in some range, typically -1..1 or 0..1
                        (for clarity, only sample connections are shown in Figure 1):
                            Figure 1
                        
                    Because it is an artificial neural network, the SOM is not explicitly
                        configured or ‘programmed’ to behave in some desired way like a conventional
                        computer, but rather learns its behaviour by exposure to input data using a
                        learning algorithm. A full explanation of SOM learning would take us too far
                        afield; details can be found in most textbooks on artificial neural
                        networks. In outline, though, learning takes place by repeated presentation
                        of vectors drawn randomly from a set V, and adjustment of the connections at
                        each presentation. The SOM is initialized by assigning random values in some
                        range (ie, 0..1) to the connections. When the first vector vi is presented,
                        it activates the processing units to varying degrees, depending on the
                        differences in connection strengths between the input buffer and each unit;
                        the most highly activated unit uj is selected, and the connections are
                        adjusted so that, next time vi is presented, uj will be even more highly
                        activated than before, thus associating vi ever more strongly with a
                        specific location on the map. As learning proceeds over—usually—many
                        thousands of presentations, each of the vectors in V is associated with a
                        specific unit in the map. After learning is complete, the entire set V is
                        presented once again. Each vector activates the unit with which it has
                        learned to become associated, and the result is a pattern of activations on
                        the map surface. That pattern is significant: the distances among activated
                        units represent the similarity relations in the input vector space.
                
                
                    COMPARATIVE STUDY
                    This comparative study confines itself to the phonetic-level representation
                        of the TLS corpus. In order to apply cluster analysis to this data, the TLS
                        had to represent it numerically. The method was as follows. For each of the
                        52 informants whose phonetic-level transcriptions had been digitized, the
                        number of token occurrences of each of the 542 state types S defined in the
                        transcription protocol was counted, where a ‘state’ is a discrete phonetic
                        segment type. Each informant’s phonetic profile was thus represented as a
                        542-element integer-valued vector V, in which any element Vi contained the
                        number of token occurrences of state Si. The set of informant vectors was
                        stored in a 52 x 542 matrix which, after normalization, served as input to
                        the various clustering algorithms used in the analysis. The present study
                        replicates the TLS data representation and cluster analyses, and then
                        compares the performance of a SOM on the same data, using a variety of
                        settings for initialization of connections, sequence of input vector
                        presentations, and map dimension.
                
                
                    CONCLUSIONS
                    Preliminary results from a relatively small subset of the 52 TLS informants
                        indicate that the SOM performs as well as the other clustering algorithms in
                        terms of its ability to identify and represent clusters, but that it is far
                        less affected by variation in processing parameters. Results for the full
                        TLS dataset will be available if and when this paper is presented.
                
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    B.
                                    Everit
                                
                            
                            Cluster Analysis
                            3rd ed.
                            
                                London
                                E. Arnold
                                1993
                                170
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Hair
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Anderson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Tatham
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Black
                                
                            
                            Multivariate Data Analysis
                            4th ed.
                            
                                Englewood Cliff, NJ
                                Prentice Hall
                                1995
                                751
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    V.
                                    Jones-Sargent
                                
                            
                            Tyne Bytes: a computerized sociolinguistic study of
                                Tyneside English
                            
                                Frankfurt am Main and New York
                                P. Lang
                                1983
                                368
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    T.
                                    Kohonen
                                
                            
                            Self-Organizing Maps
                            2nd ed.
                            
                                Berlin and New York
                                Springer
                                1995
                                312
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Pellowe
                                
                            
                            A dynamic modelling of linguistic variation: the urban
                                (Tyneside) linguistic survey
                        
                        
                            Lingua
                            
                                30
                                
                                1-30
                                1972
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    Pellowe
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    V.
                                    Jones
                                
                            
                            On intonational variety in Tyneside speech
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    P.
                                    Trudgill
                                
                            
                            Sociolinguistic Patterns of British English
                            
                                London
                                Arnold
                                1978
                                101-121
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                V.
                                    Sargent(nee Jones)
                            
                            Cycles and the equal society
                        
                        
                            Classification Society Bulletin
                            
                                4
                                3
                                31-45
                                1979
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    B.
                                    Strang
                                
                            
                            The Tyneside Linguistic Survey
                        
                        
                            Zeitschrift für Mundartforschung
                            Neue Folge
                            
                                4
                                
                                788-794
                                1968
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
