


    
        
            
                Anastasia: A New XML Publication System
                
                    
                        Peter
                        Robinson
                        
                            De Montfort University
                            peter.robinson@dmu.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Over the last decade, many humanities scholars have been persuaded by the promise
                    and the power of encoding schemes for electronic texts to create texts,
                    sometimes very large and complex, encoded using these schemes. This is specially
                    true of SGML/XML based encodings, with the implementation of the Text Encoding
                    Initiative being particularly influential in the community. However, scholars
                    who have made such texts have typically discovered that software to publish them
                    is too expensive for their limited budgets, or too difficult to use, or lacking
                    essential facilities, or all three of these.
                The Anastasia electronic publishing system, developed
                    in the last five years in a partnership between the Centre for Technology and
                    the Arts, De Montfort University, and a new electronic publishing company,
                    Scholarly Digital Editions (SDE), attempts to supply this deficiency. Anastasia stands for ‘Analytic system tools and SGML
                    integration application’. As this implies, it is able to handle all valid SGML
                    and XML documents, with no limits on their complexity.
                Particularly, Anastasia has been designed to meet the
                    needs of humanists, and especially textual scholars. It is a common complaint of
                    humanists that SGML/XML systems constrain a single hierarchical view of a
                    document, while humanities texts can be seen as containing many overlapping and
                    competing hierarchies. SGML/XML publishing systems usually cannot support
                    facilities which cut across the primary document hierarchy, and so cannot
                    satisify even such simple needs as display of a single page of transcription, or
                    display of a tabular list of key word in context search results with formatting
                    of all returned search strings according to the embedded encoding. Anastasia seeks to escape these limitations by
                    adopting a document processing model that sees the document as made up of a
                    series of events which are defined not only by their hierarchical relation, but
                    also by their left to right relation in the document stream. As a result, Anastasia provides tools which allow the document to
                    be manipulated according to alternative hierarchies implicit in the element
                    relations. Thus, one can very easily extract views of the text by column or
                    page, or indeed start a display at any point in any element and continue to any
                    point in any other element. A KWIC display, for example, requires that we
                    display an arbitrary number of characters before a hit, then display the
                    characters in the hit themselves, and then display an arbitrary number of
                    characters after the hit, all with complete awareness of the document encoding
                    within those spans of characters: Anastasia can do
                    this. Then, one should be able to click on a link from the KWIC display to the
                    document itself, and see the hits highlight in the full-text context: once more,
                        Anastasia has been designed to make this easy.
                    One can also manufacture virtual texts by extracting and combining multiple and
                    even overlapping segments.
                Anastasia is also designed to fill another need: for
                    a mode of publication which is identical on both CD-ROM and the internet, on the
                    major Windows and Macintosh systems. Typically, the scholar will prepare a body
                    of SGML/XML documents for publication using the Anastasia GroveMaker application, which compiles the documents into
                    a binary database. The Anastasia Reader then serves
                    the documents to an internet browser, either over a network or from a CD-ROM.
                    Control of all aspects of the publication's display and behaviour (including
                    fully SGML/XML aware searching) is achieved through a series of Tcl script
                    files.
                A key factor in the development of Anastasia has been
                    the desire to achieve publication without compromise. That is: if it is possible
                    to achieve a certain kind of computer display effect, then Anastasia will allow this. For example, we might want to use some of
                    the advanced dynamic HTML features permitted by Javascript: pop-up menus, text which changes colour as the mouse
                    passes over some other part of the document (for instance, to show that a word
                    or phrase in one window is a translation of, or is otherwise related to, a word
                    or phrase another window), synchronous scrolling or separate windows, and more.
                    Practically, this means that we should be able to generate streams for display
                    in any format whatever, directly from the XML: in pdf, SVG, rtf, any variant of
                    HTML and XML, and send it directly to the display engine. We have concentrated
                    on using Anastasia to generate HTML with Javascript:
                    an example of the effects possible through this can be seen in the work on the
                    digital 28th edition of the Nestle-Aland Greek New Testament, accessible through
                    nestlealand.uni-muester.de. Other instances can be seen from the SDE website,
                        .
                Anastasia is designed to work as a Apache webserver
                    module. It also requires C-language support, and the Tcl (Tool Control Language)
                    libraries. In theory at least, this means Anastasia
                    can operate whereever Apache operates: our main development is on Macintosh OS X
                    and Windows machines; there is also a Linux port. The search systems in Anastasia are based on SGREP, written by Jani Jaakkola
                    and Pekka Kilpelainen of the University of Helsinki: we have heavily customized
                    the SGREP code to improve its performance with large texts. Perhaps one of the
                    most distinctive (if not controversial) features of Anastasia is that the style sheets we use to control exactly how the
                    source XML is sent to the browser are written in Tcl, and not in any of the
                    various XML-based systems which have appeared in the last years (such as XSLT,
                    XPATH, and others). In part this is historical: the roots of Anastasia lie some distance back, as far as the first
                    work done by myself on the Canterbury Tales Project
                    with Elizabeth Solopova and Norman Blake) in 1993, long before even XML made an
                    appearance. In part, it is because those systems themselves remain in a start of
                    flux. But it is also because there is room for argument about the efficiency of
                    such schemes. There is no doubt that XML is superb at representing textual
                    structure. But this does not mean it is suitable for use as a programming
                    language, requiring ease of use, rapid development, efficient maintenance, and
                    widespread support across many different computer systems. Tcl does offer all
                    these.
                Anastasia is not intended to be the tool of choice
                    for everyone who works with XML. It is designed for situations where the very
                    best possible presentation is required of highly complex XML. A single screen of
                    the digital Nestle-Aland, for example, may draw XML from hundreds of different
                    places within the source, reformat into HTML interwoven with Javascript
                    commands, and spread this across a series of frames nested within the browser
                    display Ð all in a fraction of a second, in response to a request from the
                    reader. It is also designed to run identically on CD-ROM and over the internet.
                    Reports of the death of CD-ROM appear rather exaggerated: indeed, the
                    availability of cheaply priced publication tools such as Anastasia may make it possible for high-quality CD-ROMs to be made
                    available at much lower prices than hitherto, and so create a market which has
                    been previously elusive. Finally, my hope when designing Anastasia was that a single scholar, with reasonable dedication,
                    good knowledge of XML and with no more computer resources and support than are
                    commonly available within university departments, would be able to use it to
                    make high-quality XML based publications. There have been some encouraging signs
                    that Anastasia can indeed be used in this manner. In
                    the same context, it should also be appropriate for use by smaller academic
                    publishers.
                This is the first conference presentation of Anastasia as a mature publication system. There has been one
                    previous conference presentation of the system, at the DRRH conference in Sydney
                    in September 2001, when only a preliminary version of the software was
                    available.
            
        
    
