


    
        
            
                Solving the Legacy-Encoding Debacle with On-line
                    Transliteration
                
                    
                        John
                        Paolillo
                        
                            Indiana University
                            paolillo@indiana.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Non-roman scripts have always faced severe challenges in computer applications.
                    Early challenges concerned the lack of non-roman support in ASCII. Today,
                    Unicode provides or promises to provide support for almost all non-roman
                    scripts. But Unicode support is not widespread in many languages, for example in
                    the languages of South and Southeast Asia. In the last decade, the international
                    expansion of the World-Wide Web caused demand for non-roman text encodings to
                    rise faster than Unicode development could proceed. The consequent void was
                    filled in many cases by ad-hoc 8-bit font encodings. While these encodings lack
                    many of Unicode’s advantages, they allowed many South Asian websites, especially
                    newspaper companies, to establish a native-language web presence. Now they are
                    firmly established in use: hundreds of web sites use special 8-bit encodings,
                    with new material being added every day. These encodings are thus likely to be
                    widely used for some time, even if Unicode support grows. In addition, many
                    materials encoded in these forms are now legacy materials, and continued access
                    to them is required for historical and other studies [Baker, et al., 2000].
                These 8-bit encodings have many well-known problems, the most salient of which is
                    the large number of alternative encoding schemes. Languages such as Sinhala or
                    Tamil have three or four widely-used encodings, and Hindi has six or more. Few
                    of these encodings reflect local, regional or international standardization
                    efforts. Numerous fonts are required for display, and words are not likely to
                    match across any two texts, seriously hampering efforts to search or index the
                    documents. For example, when different newspapers use different font-based
                    encodings to post stories on the same current events, the keywords for those
                    stories will not match. Users searching for those stories must search separately
                    for pages in each of the relevant encodings, or else fail to find them entirely.
                    Many opportunities for humanistic, literary and linguistic research are
                    encumbered by this situation. Unicode alone cannot solve these problems:
                    conversion methods are needed to reconcile the variant text encodings.
                This poster presents a general solution for these problems in the from of a
                    protocol for transliterating variant text encodings of a language. The design of
                    the protocol employs conversion tables for each supported encoding written in
                    XML. Websites presenting materials in 8-bit encodings would publish such a
                    conversion table where it can be readily retrieved by browsers and search
                    engines. On the application side, the conversion tables are compiled by a
                    general transliteration program into finite state transducers. When the encoded
                    text is encountered, the transliterator is invoked to convert the encoding into
                    one that can be used for indexing or display. Font detection is supported so
                    that multilingual pages are handled appropriately, converting only that portion
                    of the text in a document whose encoding requires it.
                The transliterator may be used in any context where it is required. Search
                    engines can select a conversion target for all web pages in a given language,
                    e.g. Unicode, which would then be correctly indexed alongside other languages.
                    Similarly, browsers could convert the encoding of a web page into one for which
                    there is an available font, or convert a romanized query input into a suitable
                    representation to be matched by a search engine, etc. Application software
                    equipped to handle this protocol, whether web browsers, search engines, text
                    editors or anything else, need only know the location of the conversion table
                    for each encoding.
                The transliteration program is based on the notion of a graphic template, which
                    permits even highly complex alpha-syllabic Brahmi-based South Asian scripts to
                    be efficiently transliterated. A graphic template is used instead of, e.g.
                    phonetic representations, because it simplifies the many-to-many relations among
                    script elements and their phonetic representation. Additionally, non-programmers
                    and non-specialists can modify a conversion table more readily if its elements
                    refer to graphic elements, rather than to phones or phonemes, which require
                    specialized linguistic knowledge to appreciate. Graphic templates are finitely
                    bounded, and hence can be parsed efficiently using finite state transducers,
                    which are readily written in rule form [Antworth, 1990], hence, the conversion
                    table is a list of finite state rules. The graphic template functions as an
                    interlingual representation for the transliterator, meaning that bi-directional
                    conversions between any two variant encodings can be realized by providing a
                    suitable conversion table for each encoding. Roman transliterations are easily
                    incorporated into the same framework, meaning that the protocol can used in
                    additional ways for research purposes.
                A working prototype transliterator written in SWI-Prolog will be demonstrated in
                    several deployment scenarios: as a reading interface for several South Asian
                    Language websites, in an interactive editor for text, and in an index and a
                    query interface for a search engine. These scenarios illustrate the diversity of
                    applications of the transliterator, as well as its ease-of-use and efficiency.
                    It is hoped that widespread adoption of this system will facilitate the use of
                    non-roman text for scholars and non-scholars alike.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Evan
                                    Antworth
                                
                            
                            PC-KIMMO: A Two-Level Processor for Morphological
                                Analysis
                            
                                Dallas, Texas
                                Summer Institute of Linguistics
                                1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Paul
                                    Baker
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Tony
                                    McEnery
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Mark
                                    Leisher
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Hamish
                                    Cunningham
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Robert
                                    Gaizauskas
                                
                            
                            Mapping multiple South Asian 8-bit character sets to
                                the Unicode standard
                        
                        
                            Linguistic Exploration: Workshop on Web-Based Language
                                Documentation and Description
                            
                                Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
                                Institute for Research on Cognitive Science, University
                                    of Pennsylvania
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Unicode Consortium
                            
                            The Unicode Standard
                            Version 3.0
                            
                                New York, New York
                                Addison-Wesley Longman
                                2002
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
