


    
        
            
                Chinese Collections in Museums on the Web: Current
                    Status, Problems, and Future
                
                    
                        Hsin-Liang
                        Chen
                        
                            Graduate School of Library and Information
                                Science, UT-Austin
                            chen@gslis.uexas.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    INTRODUCTION
                    With the development of computing technology, many Chinese museums and
                        museums with significant Chinese collections have digitized and provided
                        images of their collections on Web sites. These online resources offer users
                        around the world access to valuable treasures to learn about Chinese
                        culture. However, there are obstacles that must be overcome to achieve the
                        goals of promoting the Chinese heritage and educating new generations.
                    The purpose of this project is to study how museum practitioners use current
                        image indexing practices and services to retrieve the images of the Chinese
                        collections. Several issues, including image needs, information-seeking
                        strategies, information queries, search functions, display formats and
                        human-computer interaction are examined in this study.
                    This paper focuses specifically on the current practices of image management.
                        The following questions are addressed:
                            What kind of images do the museums index?
                            How do the museums index their image collections?
                            What kind of indexing tools do the museums use?
                        
                
                
                    BACKGROUND OF THE PROBLEM
                    
                        CURRENT IMAGE MANAGEMENT AT MUSEUMS AND ART LIBRARIES
                        Graham (1999) surveyed 60 art libraries in the U.K. The survey included
                            the important issues of image collections, cataloging and indexing
                            practices, content-based image retrieval (CBIR) systems, and the use of
                            images. Graham’s study reports on the current management of image
                            collections and techniques for image and video retrieval in the U.K.
                            Eakins and Graham (1999) study the current state of the art in CBIR
                            systems within the U.K. and submit several suggestions to U.K.
                            governmental agencies, users and managers of image collections, and CBIR
                            software developers. The Visual Image User Study (VIUS) project at Penn
                            State University is conducting an extensive and systematic assessment of
                            its needs for digital image delivery (Pisciotta, et al, 2001). The VIUS
                            project is working to develop digital picture libraries to serve new
                            uses of digital images for teaching and research.
                    
                    
                        IMPORTANCE OF INFORMATION NEEDS AND INFORMATION-SEEKING BEHAVIOR TO
                            SYSTEM DESIGN
                        Stephenson (1999) examined several cultural heritage image databases and
                            identified key issues for future improvements. She pointed out that, in
                            addition to technological challenges, the areas of audience, user
                            behavior, and use should be addressed as well. According to Stephenson,
                            museums should examine:
                                For whom are museums building an image database?
                                What image databases are museums building?
                                What are those users’ purposes in using the image
                                    database?
                                What functionality do the users need to use the
                                    database?
                            
                        These questions reflect a user-centered design philosophy which assists
                            database designers understand their users thoroughly.
                        
                            
                                Defining the primary user group
                            
                            One of the major goals of an online image database is to break the
                                barriers of time differences, geographical locations, and limited
                                physical access to materials. This brings up a critical question:
                                who is the user? The online database is likely to serve a diverse
                                group of users: local and remote users, experienced and naïve
                                users, and existing and new users. Different user services are
                                required for this diverse group of users. Museums should examine the
                                institutional goals and purposes of their online image databases to
                                determine the priority of their missions.
                        
                        
                            
                                Understanding anticipated users
                            
                            After determining their primary user group, the museums should study
                                their users. The following questions should be considered:
                                    Goals of designing an online image database
                                    Differences between existing access to the image
                                        collection and the use of the new online image
                                        database
                                    Anticipated users’ behavior in different locations
                                    Selection of surrogates for image indexing and
                                        retrieval
                                    Information architecture of the online image
                                        database
                                
                        
                        
                            
                                Supporting discovery and retrieval
                            
                            To use the online image database successfully, the users should have
                                knowledge of information retrieval in general, subject areas, and
                                search systems. On the other hand, the museums should investigate
                                the following factors:
                                    Indexing standards such as metadata
                                    Query analysis
                                    Effectiveness and efficiency of indexing tools and
                                        methods
                                    Multi-dimensional indexing and retrieval methods
                                    Users’ capabilities
                                    User support and training
                                
                        
                        
                            
                                Supporting functionality
                            
                            New functions may be created to facilitate users’ search strategies.
                                To achieve such goals, studies on interface design, human-computer
                                interaction, and users’ information-seeking behavior should be
                                conducted. Different tools may be required by special users and
                                environments.
                        
                        
                            
                                Other challenges
                            
                            In addition to the above key issues, the museums also face several
                                    challenges:
                                    lack of communication among museums;
                                    lack of indexing standards and tools; and
                                    lack of translation standards of Chinese into western
                                        languages.
                                
                            Chinese museums and museums with significant Chinese collections
                                should form a consortium to establish communication and to develop
                                collaboration. Many western museums have begun those efforts. The
                                Art Museum Image Consortium (AMICO) is one of those consortiums, but
                                its image collections only have about 6,000 works from Asian
                                cultures (AMICO, 2001). The lack of indexing standards and tools is
                                the same challenge for all museums. Most museums either develop
                                their own indexing standards and tools or do not have adequate
                                professional personnel to manage their image collections (CLIR,
                                1999; Graham, 1999). Regarding translation standards, although
                                American libraries started using Pinyin as the standard romanization
                                scheme for Chinese characters on October 1, 2000 (RLG, 2000), many
                                museums may not be aware of this change and may still use the
                                Wade-Giles system. These challenges are important to the development
                                of image collections.
                        
                    
                
                
                    METHODOLOGY
                    
                        PARTICIPANTS
                        Six museums were selected for this study based on the size and diversity
                            of their Chinese collections or their image management. The six
                            participating museums were in the states of California, Illinois,
                            Massachusetts, New York, Ohio, and Washington, D.C.
                    
                    
                        PROCEDURE
                        
                            
                                Pre-visit questionnaire
                            
                            A set of self-administered questionnaires was used to collect
                                librarians’ views on cataloging/indexing practices, the functions of
                                new image management systems, and the use of images. The
                                questionnaires were distributed to librarians before an on-site
                                visit and were collected between January and April 2002.
                        
                        
                            
                                Follow-up phone interview
                            
                            After all respondents answered the questionnaires, the investigator
                                examined the questionnaires and conducted phone interviews with the
                                respondents for unclear answers and in-depth information. The
                                investigator identified several key people for observations and
                                interviews when visiting museums.
                        
                        
                            
                                On-site visit
                            
                            Based on the knowledge gained from the questionnaires and phone
                                interviews, on-site visits were conducted between June and August
                                2002. The investigator observed librarians and museum practitioners’
                                image seeking behavior and also interviewed those people for further
                                understanding of their search behavior. The investigator interviewed
                                museum administrators to obtain their expectations for digital image
                                management in the mission of the museum.
                        
                    
                
                
                    RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
                    According to the questionnaires, observations, and interviews, the
                        investigator reports on the current status, problems, and future of image management:
                            Current Status: all six museums have
                                been digitizing the Chinese collections. Photographic prints,
                                photographic negatives, and transparencies/slides (35 mm) are the
                                most popular formats. All the museums have used or purchased a
                                computer-based image management system to organize the digital
                                images and related information.
                            Problems: most museums did not have
                                comprehensive records in the past, so they have spent substantial
                                amounts of their budgets and people-power to establish basic records
                                or re-enter data for the digital images. Their conventional
                                cataloging and indexing practices are not suitable or transferable
                                for the new image management system. Image management systems used
                                by the six museums are not able to accommodate the features of the
                                Chinese collections and their records. Most image management systems
                                are not metadata/XML ready, which means that the expansion of the
                                systems onto the Web may be limited. Each museum has its unique
                                institutional structure, which hinders the workflow of image
                                management and a lack of communication and collaboration exists
                                among museums departments. 
                            Future: the development of the
                                indexing schema is critical to the management of digital images and
                                to the museum practitioners and on-line users. Image management
                                systems should be enhanced with the standards of metadata/XML, etc.
                                for the Web-based environment. 
                        
                    Regarding the image-seeking behavior of museum practitioners, and the
                        administration's expectations of digital images, the investigator will
                        report the findings of these issues in the future.
                
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Art Museum Image Consortium (AMICO)
                            
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                         (access September, 2001)
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Council on Library and Information Resources
                            
                             Scholarship, instruction, and libraries at the turn of
                                the century: Results from five task forces of learned societies and
                                the Council on Library and Information Resources
                            
                                Washington, D.C.
                                 The Council
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    P.
                                    Eakins
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    E.
                                    Graham
                                
                            
                             Content-based image retrieval: A report to the JISC
                                Technology Application Programme
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                        [Online]: 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    E.
                                    Graham
                                
                            
                            The description and indexing of images: Report of a
                                survey of ARLIS members, 1998/99
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                        [Online]. Available: 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    Pisciotta
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Brisson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    Ferrin
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Dooris
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Spink
                                
                            
                            Penn State Visual Image User Study
                        
                        
                            D-Lib Magazine
                            
                                
                                July/August
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                        URL: (access September 2001).
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Research Libraries Group (RLG)
                            
                            Library of Congress, other US libraries join
                                international community on use of Pinyin
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                        URL: (access
                            September, 2001)..
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Stephenson
                                
                            
                            “Recent developments in cultural heritage image
                                databases: directions for user-centered design
                        
                        
                            Library-Trends
                            
                                48
                                2
                                410-437
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
