


    
        
            
                Confronting the Challenges in Collaborative Editing
                    Projects: The Dickinson Electronic Archives File
                    Management System
                
                    
                        Lara
                        Vetter
                        
                            Maryland Institute for Technology in the
                                Humanities, University of Maryland, College
                                Park
                            LV26@umail.umd.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Jarom
                        McDonald
                        
                            Maryland Institute for Technology in the
                                Humanities, University of Maryland, College Park
                            jmcdon@glue.umd.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                This year, the Dickinson Electronic Archives (DEA) began work on an edition of
                    Emily Dickinson’s Correspondences (EDC), a multi-volume TEI-conformant XML
                    scholarly edition of individual collections of letters and poems sent to and
                    from Dickinson to her various correspondents that will include manuscript
                    images, transcriptions, and critical annotation. Overseen by general editors
                    Martha Nell Smith, Ellen Louise Hart, Lara Vetter, and Marta Werner, and
                    coordinated by Vetter, EDC volumes are guest-edited
                    correspondence-by-correspondence by Dickinson scholars across the country. The
                    project is ambitious in scope; Dickinson sent over 1800 letters and poems to
                    about 100 friends, family, and acquaintances, and conceivably many individual
                    guest editors could be working simultaneously on various sets of documents.
                The DEA faces several challenges in managing the concurrent editing of the
                    voluminous correspondence, not the least of which is geographical. All four
                    general editors are dispersed geographically: Smith in Maryland, Hart in
                    California, Vetter in Missouri, and Werner in New York. The DEA project manager,
                    Jarom McDonald, and encoding staff are located in Maryland at the Maryland
                    Institute for Technology in the Humanities, while guest editors live and work
                    all over the country. The documents are located primarily in two different
                    libraries in Massachusetts with scattered manuscripts elsewhere, and the encoded
                    data resides on a server at Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities
                    in Virginia. Clearly, we need a system by which the geographically remote
                    project coordinator can track the status of multiple documents in multiple
                    correspondences at various stages of editing and encoding, and work with a staff
                    and editors at a distance. We also face the utter impracticality of training
                    innumerable guest editors in advanced TEI and XML, particularly given the
                    encoding difficulties posed by the experimental nature of Dickinson’s page, yet
                    we need to maintain consistency in encoding and editing across sets of
                    correspondence, all the while preserving the integrity of the individual
                    editor’s work.
                Originally conceived by Lara Vetter and implemented by Jarom McDonald, the
                    Dickinson Electronic Archives Manuscript Project File Management System is
                    designed to allow editors and staff working from different locations across the
                    country to collaborate on the production of XML files for web delivery. The
                    system will accommodate multiple editors and staff working on different subsets
                    of documents.
                The DEA Manuscript Project File Management System facilitates the following processes:
                        1. For each manuscript, the editor completes a php-driven submission
                            form collecting relevant information about that manuscript. When the
                            form is submitted, it writes an XML file that parses against the DEA
                            DTD, pulling additional data from SQL regularization databases, and
                            deposits the file into the directory for newly submitted documents;
                            whatever data cannot be automatically tagged is placed in a comment tag
                            to provide instruction to the encoder. When the form is deposited into
                            the directory, the editor receives a copy via email, and the project
                            coordinator is notified via email that new manuscript data has been
                            submitted. Additionally, an entry in the SQL-driven management
                            submission database is generated that contains the filename, the
                            editor’s name, and the date the file was submitted. Finally, a
                            &lt;revisionDesc&gt; statement is generated and placed
                            automatically into the XML file, containing information about the nature
                            of the action, the person who performed it, and the date.
                        2. The project coordinator logs into the administrative section of the
                            system and is presented with a complete list of all submitted documents
                            pending assignment to encoders. The coordinator can assign each document
                            individually to any of the current DEA encoders via a drop-down menu;
                            doing so will automatically generate and send an email to that encoder,
                            notifying him/her of the new assignment. The corresponding entry in the
                            submission log will be updated to reflect the encoder assigned to the
                            project.
                        3. The encoder logs into the “Document Check-in/Check-out” section of
                            the system and is presented with a complete list of all documents
                            pending to be downloaded and those which have previously been
                            checked-out for encoding but not yet uploaded. The encoder clicks on the
                            file to be downloaded and is taken to the download page, where he/she
                            can save the file locally for encoding. This step updates the submission
                            log entry, noting the date that the file was downloaded for encoding,
                            and moves the particular file from the “pending check-out” section to
                            the “pending check-in” section for the given encoder. This step also
                            automatically updates the &lt;resp&gt; attribute in the header
                            that signifies the encoder. The encoder’s job is to perform
                            post-processing on the XML file by utilizing the editor’s notes,
                            comparing the XML file to an electronic image of the manuscript, and
                            tagging everything that cannot be automatically generated by the
                            form.
                        4. When the encoder has finished with the file locally, he/she can log
                            back into the system and click on the entry to “check-in.” The encoder
                            is then taken to the upload page and deposits the newly encoded file in
                            a directory separate from that which the editor-submitted file is
                            located. Checking a file in through the system will update the
                            submission log to reflect the date of encoder uploading, as well as
                            generating another &lt;revisionDesc&gt; entry into the document
                            itself. The project coordinator/proofreader is also notified via
                            automatic email that the encoded file has been uploaded.
                        5. Upon logging back into the system, the project coordinator is
                            presented with a list of files that need to be proofread, in addition to
                            seeing which files need assignment to encoders (see item 2 above). These
                            files can be checked-out and checked-in for proofreading in the same
                            manner as described above for encoders; each action generates the
                            relevant entry in the submission log. Downloading modifies the
                            &lt;resp&gt; element that signifies the proofreader’s name, and
                            when the final proofed file has been uploaded, it is deposited in a
                            third directory; hence, all archival copies of the document are
                            preserved. Once the proofreader has uploaded the file, a third
                            &lt;revisionDesc&gt; entry is generated and written into the
                            file and the coordinator is notified via e-mail.
                        6. Finally, when the proofreader is done, an automatically generated
                            e-mail is sent to the editor(s) with a URL for a transformed version of
                            the file. The editor then visits the URL indicated to perform a final
                            proofing of the document; the HTML page gives the editor the option to
                            accept or modify the file, and the coordinator is notified of the status
                            of the document. If the file is accepted, it is copied to the public
                            directory and becomes available online; if it is modified, the editor’s
                            modifications (again, submitted via a php-form) are routed back to the
                            proofreader who can make the final emendations and subsequently upload
                            the document into the public directory.
                    
                Additionally, the project coordinator has access to a report feature, which
                    returns the entire SQL database of the submission log. This allows her to
                    monitor the status of all ongoing projects and documents and to track what
                    documents individual editors, encoders, and proofreaders are currently working
                    on.
                Though there will, undoubtedly, be issues with certain edited documents that
                    cannot be addressed through the type of automation described above, the document
                    management system will do much to streamline the editing and encoding process
                    and increase the quantity and quality of work done by the dispersed staff.
                    Decisions about what to tag and how to tag complex features of Dickinson’s
                    manuscripts are made by the general editors and enforced by the editorial
                    submission form, so documents are encoded consistently across the various sets
                    of correspondence. Editors can focus on editing, without having to learn
                    advanced XML and TEI (although the system, as designed, will accept XML tags as
                    part of submitted editorial data for those editors who are familiar with the TEI
                    and the Dickinson project DTD). Encoders can focus on encoding, without being
                    called upon to make difficult editorial choices. Ultimately, the entire process
                    will facilitate integrity in editing, quality control, and institutional
                    memory.
            
        
    
