


    
        
            
                Figura: A Tool for the Collaborative Editing of
                    Non-nesting Content
                
                    
                        Rafael
                        Alvarado
                        
                            Princeton University
                            alvarado@princeton.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Sarah-Jane
                        Murray
                        
                            Princeton University
                            sjmurray@princeton.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Figura is a web-based database application designed to support the Charrette
                    Project at Princeton University (Uitti 1997). In particular, it supports the
                    work of creating a TEI-compliant critical edition of the Old French manuscript
                    tradition of Chrétien de Troyes’s Le Chevalier de la
                        Charrette. The application addresses the shortcomings of a
                    traditional, purely document-centric approach to humanities computing
                    applications (described below) through the use of a database management system
                    that acts as a pre-processor for marked up documents. The motivation behind the
                    use of a database has not been to supplant the primary role of XML and the TEI
                    in the development of digital critical editions, but rather to avoid having to
                    employ an “extreme markup” solution that would further complicate an already
                    difficult set of technologies. Instead, Figura targets the black box of
                    traditional humanities computing applications-the indexing engine-and replaces
                    it with something that is more accommodating to the specific needs of scholars,
                    all the while keeping document encoding standards intact.
                The traditional approach to humanities computing applications is one in which
                    primary source materials are marked up using a textual encoding standard, such
                    as the TEI (Sperberg-McQueen, Burnard et al. 1994), in order to produce “thick
                    documents” that contain both primary and interpretive content in a single
                    document or collection of documents. These documents are then made available for
                    use by the scholarly public by means of a transformation engine that can
                    generate content in a standard, viewable format, such as HTML, and an indexing
                    engine that will allow the document web to be searched, presumably taking
                    advantage of the rich markup found in the source documents.
                A primary task of the Charrette Project has been to encode a set of rhetorical
                    figures—e.g. instances of chiasmus, adnominatio, enjambment, etc.—in the
                    critical edition of the text (Uitti and Foulet 1989). Because of their large
                    number and radically non-nesting character, however, the prospect of directly
                    encoding the figures into the text, using the technique of segmenting and
                    splicing elements, has seemed impractical at best. In addition, the Charrette
                    Project has been collaborative from the outset, involving the work of many
                    editorial assistants, both over time and at any given time. Each editor has been
                    in charge of a figure type, and has been responsible for locating figure
                    instances in the entire document. In the traditional approach, this division of
                    labor would have to be carried out serially, and therefore the length of time
                    required to complete the project would multiply by the number of assistants
                    involved. Each of these problems was solved through the use of a database to
                    store the textual content of the Foulet-Uitti edition.
                The problem of encoding non-hierarchical and multiple hierarchies of content
                    objects using markup technologies such as SGML and XML is well documented
                    (Renear, Mylonas et al. 1996; Alvarado 1999; Sperberg-McQueen and Huitfeldt
                    1999). In areas where this problem cannot be ignored, such as the analysis of
                    qualitative data and discourse, the principle of standoff markup has been
                    developed by several groups (Thompson and McKelvie 1997; Müller and Strube 2001;
                    Glass and Eugenio 2002). Figura employs a methodology similar to that of these
                    examples—which makes sense, given the kinship between discourse analysis and
                    rhetoric—but makes use of a relational database, rather than a collection of
                    documents, to store the links between textual elements and their affiliations in
                    figural elements. The advantage of this approach is that editors are freed from
                    the well-formedness constraint of XML. Once the data is entered, an algorithm
                    may be applied to the join the source document and its non-nesting elements, to
                    produce well-formed XML—or even MECS—using a variety of techniques, such as
                    automated splicing or CSS grouping.
                Standoff markup also allows for rich, secondary content to be stored
                    independently of the source document. This enables parallel, collaborative
                    editing, a problem that has not received a great deal of treatment in the
                    literature, but which posed a threat to the timely completion of the Charrette
                    Project. With Figura, editorial assistants use a web-based markup tool at the
                    same time, without worrying about editing collisions, and with the assurance
                    that their figural data are immediately available to everyone else in the
                    project.
                Beyond the immediate gains of such an approach for the Charrette Project, Figura
                    introduces a novel approach to humanities computing applications that is worth
                    consideration and development by others. One of the greatest shortcomings of the
                    traditional approach to humanities computing applications is that it relegates
                    the decisive task of indexing to proprietary technologies, such as DynaText or
                    Oracle Text, which are not only inaccessible to the designers of humanities
                    applications, but are designed for commerce and not scholarship. Because the
                    indexing engine has the pivotal role of mediating between source archive and
                    end-user web, a consistent result is that marked up documents end up being
                    “smarter” than their published variants, leaving a wide gap between a project’s
                    collection of marked up texts and the documents that most scholars end up
                    seeing. Put in bare economic terms, indexing engines have been grossly
                    inefficient converters of scholarly labor into intellectual product. McGann once
                    described this situation as a “gulf separating a Unix from a Mac world,” and
                    advocated the construction of two separate schemes to support each side of what
                    he characterized as a “double helix” (McGann 1997). Figura seeks to eliminate
                    the gap in the first place by inverting the relationship between index and
                    archive—essentially, by treating the index as the text itself.
                In our poster presentation we will present the Figura application and describe
                    its architecture, its place in the Charrette Project, and the design philosophy
                    behind the application. We will also try to focus as much attention on how the
                    application is designed as on how it is used by scholars in actual situations of
                    interpretation. Figura is above all a practical application, created to meet
                    directly the needs of scholars; it was not conceived as a formal solution to an
                    abstract problem. Finally, we will also present what we consider to be the
                    principle shortcomings of the application, covering cases where it is most and
                    least suitable, and compare it to related initiatives.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    R.
                                    Alvarado
                                
                            
                            Of Media, Data, Documents: An Argument for the
                                Importance of Relational Technology to the Project of Humanities
                                Computing
                        
                        
                            Annual ACH-ALLC Conference, Charlottesville,
                                Virginia
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Glass
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    B.
                                    D.
                                    Eugenio
                                
                            
                            MUP: The UIC Standoff Markup Tool
                        
                        
                            Third SIGDial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue
                                (SIGDial-02), Philadelphia
                            
                                
                                
                                2002
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    McGann
                                
                            
                            Imagining What You Don’t Know: The Theoretical Goals of
                                the Rosetti Archive
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                Institute for Advanced Technology in the
                                    Humanities
                                1997
                                2002
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Müller
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    M.
                                    Strube
                                
                            

                            MMAX: A Tool for the Annotation of Multi-modal
                                Corpora
                        
                        
                            2nd Workshop IJCAI Workshop on Knowledge and Reasoning
                                in Practical Dialogue Systems.
                            
                                Seattle
                                SIGdial
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            
                                    E.
                                    Mylonas
                                 et al 
                            Refining our Notion of What Text Really Is: The Problem
                                of Overlapping Hierarchies
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    N.
                                    Ide
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    S.
                                    Hockey
                                
                            
                            Research in Humanities Computing
                            
                                Oxford, UK
                                Oxford University Press
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    L.
                                    Burnard
                                 et al 
                            Guidelines for electronic text encoding and
                                interchange
                            
                                Chicago and Oxford
                                Text Encoding Initiative
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    M.
                                    Sperberg-McQueen
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    C.
                                    Huitfeldt
                                
                            
                            GODDAG: A Data Structure for Overlapping
                                Hierarchies
                        
                        
                            Annual ACH-ALLC Conference, Charlottesville,
                                Virginia
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    H.
                                    S.
                                    Thompson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    McKelvie
                                
                            
                            Hyperlink semantics for standoff markup of read-only
                                documents
                        
                        
                            Language Technology Group, HCRC, University of
                                Edinburgh
                            
                                
                                
                                1997
                                2002
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    K.
                                    D.
                                    Uitti
                                
                            
                            A Brief History of the ‘Charrette Project’ and Its
                                Basic Rationale
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                1997
                            
                        
                        []. Last accessed
                            11/25/2002
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    K.
                                    D.
                                    Uitti
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Foulet
                                
                            
                            Le Chevalier de la Charrette
                            
                                
                                Classiques Garnier
                                1989
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
