


    
        
            
                TAPoR Tools: Portal text analysis tools and other
                    primitives
                
                    
                        Geoffrey
                        Rockwell
                        
                            McMaster University
                            grockwel@mcmaster.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Lian
                        Yan
                        
                            McMaster University
                            lyan@mcmaster.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Stéfan
                        Sinclair
                        
                            University of Alberta
                            Stefan.Sinclair@ualberta.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    This poster will demonstrate a collection of text processing tools designed
                        to work through a portal over the Web. The tools are designed to work on
                        plain text, html or xml encoded e-texts. They are easily used to search
                        electronic texts without the need to install software, preprocess the texts,
                        or master complex tools.
                
                
                    HOW DO TAPOR.TOOLS (T.TOOLS) WORK?
                    T.tools are written in Ruby, an object-oriented scripting language like Perl
                        and Python.Ruby is available for Macintosh, Unix and Windows at
                            the “Ruby Home Page”, URL: ,
                            Accessed Nov. 20, 2002. The T.tools are written so that they can
                        be run on the command line or as CGI programs off our portal. This means
                        that users of the tools need not install or maintain them, but if they wish,
                        advanced users can download and adapt them.
                    Using Web forms as an interface to the tools gives T.tools the capacity to be
                        easily adapted to hide complexity or to provide local adaptations. Simple
                        search and concordance forms can be created that can utilize xml markup
                        without having to change the tools. Small scale publishers of electronic
                        texts can provide T.tool Web forms that process their Web accessible e-texts
                        without installing the software. The forms simply pass the URL for the text
                        in a hidden field to the appropriate tool residing on our portal for
                        processing. (We will demonstrate the adaptation of these tools to support
                        the Hyperliste project, a collection of French medieval poetry online.)
                
                
                    WHAT ARE PORTAL TOOLS?
                    A portal is an entry point into a field.Katz, Richard N. and
                            Associates. Web Portals and Higher Education;
                                Technologies to Make IT Personal. San Francisco:
                            Jossey-Bass, 2002. In this case the T.tools are written to
                        provide simple text processing tools for TAPoR (Text Analysis Portal for
                        Research), a multi-institutional project which has Canada Foundation for
                        Innovation funding to create a portal for text analysis.Text
                            Analysis Portal for Research, URL: ,
                            Accessed Nov. 21, 2002. It should be noted that in this poster
                            presentation we will not be presenting on the portal as a whole, just a
                            specific set of tools designed to work through (or not) the portal that
                            is being implemented.They are designed to provide a suite of
                        simple text transformations that will eventually be managed by a portal
                        environment that additionally provides user and interface customization
                        tools. At present they can do the following:
                            List and count words in a text.
                            List and count elements in an xml text.
                            List attributes and values in an xml text.
                            Extract elements from an xml text.
                            Find patterns (words or phrases) in a text.
                            Find patterns in specific elements in a text.
                            Create a concordance of found patterns or elements.
                            Output results in either html for reading or xml for further
                                processing.
                        
                    This combination of functions allows the user to query an xml text to find
                        words in specific parts of text or to extract selected parts by element name
                        and attribute value. Users can also, should they not know the structure of
                        the text, get a list of the elements or a list of words to search for. Users
                        have a choice of output from simple output in html to output in xml that
                        could be saved and processed locally.
                
                
                    WHAT TYPES OF USERS ARE ENVISAGED?
                    T.tools are designed to be used in three ways by users of differing levels of
                        expertise.
                    Introductory Users. A portal should be place one can
                        learn through playful discovery about a field like computer assisted text
                        analysis. T.tools are designed so that new users can try basic operations on
                        electronic texts without having to install software or texts. As the T.tools
                        do not preprocess texts they can be run on any text a new user can find on
                        the Web. This allows a new user to experiment with text analysis on texts
                        they know without much training. The tools are also designed so that they
                        can be explained and documented in different ways to make them accessible to
                        different communities.
                    Small E-text Publishers. While large e-text projects
                        have access to programmers and systems that allow them to adapt text
                        processing tools to their texts, many small projects cannot afford to do
                        more than make available their scholarly texts on the Web in html or xml/css
                        form. T.tools provides tools run on our server which can be passed a text
                        (actually a URL) for processing from a Web form set up by the publisher.
                        Thus small projects can adapt our forms to their needs and integrate them
                        into their sites.
                    Advanced Users. As the code is made available as
                        “open source” according to the definition at the Open Source Initiative,
                        advanced users can download it and adapt it to their research needs.”The Open Source Definition”, URL: ,
                            Accessed Nov. 20, 2002. T.tools have been built around a library
                        of object classes commonly used in text processing whose methods can be
                        called in new Ruby scripts, from the command line, or through IRB
                        (Interactive Ruby). Thus the advanced user can use T.tools as a text
                        processing language and then build new scripts to do things unanticipated by
                        the developers.
                
                
                    WHAT ARE THE PROBLEMS WITH THIS MODEL?
                    The major drawback to this model is that T.tools are slow by comparison to
                        other Web text tools like TACTWeb because they do not work with preprocessed
                            indexes.For more on TACTWeb see URL: , Accessed Nov. 20,
                            2002. TACTWeb is built on TACT which has a preindexing program MAKEBASE
                            which prepares the Text DataBase file (TDB) which is then used by TACT
                            and TACTWeb to quickly process queries. T.tools work best on
                        chapter to book length texts not on larger corpora. The processing
                        capabilities of the server used for the portal is also important. TAPoR has
                        been funded to install high-end servers for the portal that will partially
                        compensate for the cost of processing, but there is no substitution for more
                        efficient tools when dealing with large texts. This is an issue which
                        deserves further study. Further, T.tools is based on a “pipe-and-flow” model
                        common in the Unix world which may not scale to certain types of interactive
                        processing needed in the humanities, for example, situations where texts are
                        being enriched and studied simultaneously.
                
                
                    WHY A POSTER?
                    This project is presented as a poster as that will provide the most
                        convenient way to demonstrate the tools to potential users and redevelopers.
                        Through the venue of a poster session we can demonstrate how T.tools work on
                        the texts of the poster visitors. It will also allow us to engage humanists
                        with small text projects that might benefit from such tools. With individual
                        visitors we can adapt Web forms to show the usefulness of T.tools to their
                        projects. CD-ROMs of the code and documentation will be distributed to
                        advanced users.
                
            
        
    
