


    
        
            
                Burrowing into Translation: A Case Study
                
                    
                        Jan
                        Rybicki
                        
                            Pedagogical University, Krakow, Poland
                                strybick@cyf-kr.edu.pl
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                While computational stylistics and text analysis seems to be in constant quest
                    for the just right set of criteria (see e.g. David Hoover’s presentation at the
                    2002 ALLC/ACH Conference in Tübingen), this presentation will try to apply what
                    has already become a standard in statistical stylistic analysis to a
                    (relatively) novel material. Taking for granted—very unoriginally—the usefulness
                    of John Burrows’s method that has been around since his 1987 Computation into Criticism, in discerning stylistic differences
                    between individual characters in works by the same author, I will try to see if
                    the same or similar patterns of similarity and difference travel across
                    linguistic boundaries; if differences between characters’ “idiolects” are
                    preserved in translation.
                In a typically Polish approach to the matter, I have chosen as my material the
                    trilogy of historical romances by Poland’s first literary Nobel Prize winner,
                    Henryk Sienkiewicz, written between 1882 and 1888, and its two English (or, more
                    precisely, American) translations by Jeremiah Curtin (completed between 1890 and
                    1893) and W.S. Kuniczak (1991). The reasons for this choice have been manifold.
                    First, Sienkiewicz’s three novels, With Fire and Sword,
                        The Deluge, and Pan
                        Michael, although set in the turmoil of 17th-century Poland, remain
                    to this day a major classic of Polish literature and the country’s most popular
                    reading. Second, a trilogy, the subsequent parts of which share some of their
                    characters, seems ideal for Burrowsian analysis (a fact confirmed by the
                    interesting coincidence of John Burrows’s undertaking of a study of Beckett’s
                    bilingual trilogy in a much later paper). The final reason was the difference
                    between the two translations, evident both in their being separated by an entire
                    century and, what follows, in the entirely different approaches and results
                    obtained by the two translators: the largely word-by-word transcoding by
                    Sienkiewicz’s contemporary and the highly adaptative and “free” method of the
                    modern Polish-American writer.
                Faithfully maintaining the original Burrows model, the study of distances between
                    the “idiolects” of the major characters has been based on relative frequencies
                    of the 30 most frequent words in the dialogue of each version of the trilogy.
                    The resulting correlation matrices were then used to produce two-dimensional
                    multidimensional scaling charts of distances between such “idiolects.”
                This procedure has yielded, in Sienkiewicz’s original, a very consistent
                    influence of the personae’s social status and ethnic background, especially in
                    the first part of the series. It is particularly visible in idiolects of ‘enemy’
                    (non-Polish) collective characters, usually plotted at some distance one from
                    the other. Curtin’s translation is notable for ‘de-clustering’ idiolects of
                    various Polish gentry characters, making their idiolects much less alike. There
                    is also a visible tendency in Curtin to limit the distances between rival
                    collective characters and making them markedly similar rather than divergent as
                    in the original. Idiolects in Kuniczak are even more evenly distributed, with a
                    general trend towards greater distances and less clustering observable in the
                    graphs. The very high resemblance between the idiolects of two major characters,
                    Zagloba and Wolodyjowski, in all three versions of The
                        Deluge (almost identical in Sienkiewicz) is one of the most
                    consistent traits of this portion of the analysis—an interesting illustration of
                    the fact that the two personae’s function of keeping the three volumes together
                    becomes evident in the second part of the series. Sienkiewicz's social/ethnic
                    idiosyncrasy has been confirmed in a plot for idiolects of characters involved
                    in the Polish-Ukrainian conflict in With Fire and
                    Sword, a feature slightly visible in Kuniczak and almost not at all in
                    Curtin.
                As perhaps the most consistent effect of all, the peripheral situation of female
                    idiolects is a constant element in almost any configuration. The study of more
                    detailed and thematic configurations of characters is also the source of
                    interesting insight. Plots for female characters exhibit a tendency to group
                    together young (and marriageable) Polish women; Helena's Ukrainian provenience
                    is highly visible in Sienkiewicz, while the ethnic element is indiscernible in
                    both translations. Among characters involved in each novel’s eternal triangles,
                    both of the above aspects are clearly visible in all three versions; differences
                    between characters in the same triangle are quite considerable.
                In an examination of characters that recur throughout the series, a good
                    consistence has been observed between the three idiolects of the Polish
                    Falstaff, Zagloba, the most inveterate talker of the series, in each version
                    separately: best in Sienkiewicz, worst in Curtin. Another character,
                    Wolodyjowski, is much more of a developing character, which agrees well with the
                    evolution of the persona in the course of the series, from a humble officer to
                    the hero and spearhead of Sienkiewicz’s ideology. This has been confirmed in a
                    separate plotting of idiolects of those two characters.
                A number of joint plots for Curtin’s and Kuniczak’s translations (based on
                    frequent words common in both versions) has been made to investigate if there is
                    a constant pattern in their respective differences. In agreement with some
                    “intuitive” assessments as to the decreasing differences between Curtin’s and
                    Kuniczak’s versions (mainly due to Kuniczak’s gradual abandonment of adaptative
                    procedures, especially on the microstructural level), the patterns become more
                    consistent with time: fairly chaotic movement for the first part of the trilogy
                    has become more ordered in the second and almost uniform in the third. The
                    “stylistic drift” observed between idiolects in Curtin and in Kuniczak— divided,
                    apart from their contrasting approaches to translation, by an even more
                    significant difference of a whole century—is a vindication of Burrows’s
                    ‘tiptoeing towards the infinite:’ that visible and uniform shift in the
                    configuration of the most frequent words in English texts with time.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    D.
                                    L.
                                    Hoover
                                
                            
                            New Directions in Statistical Stylistics and Authorship
                                Attribution
                        
                        
                            Proc. ALLC/ACH 2002
                            
                                
                                
                                2002
                                51-53
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    F.
                                    Burrows
                                
                            
                            Computation into Criticism: A Study of Jane Austen’s
                                Novels and an Experiment in Method
                            
                                Oxford
                                Clarendon Press
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    F.
                                    Burrows
                                
                            
                            Tiptoeing into the Infinite: Testing for Evidence of
                                National Differences in the Language of English Narrative
                        
                        
                            Research in Humanities Computing
                            
                                2
                                
                                1-33
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    W.
                                    McKenna
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    J.
                                    F.
                                    Burrows
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Antonia
                                
                            
                            Beckett’s Trilogy: Computational Stylistics and the
                                Nature of Translation
                        
                        
                            Revue informatique et statistique dans les sciences
                                humaines
                            
                                35
                                
                                151-71
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jan
                                    Rybicki
                                
                            
                            A Computer Assisted Comparative Analysis of Two English
                                Translations of Henryk Sienkiewicz’s Trilogy
                            
                                Kraków
                                WAP
                                2003
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
