


    
        
            
                Preservation of the New Media Arts
                
                    
                        Megan
                        Winget
                        
                            UNC - Chapel Hill
                            winget@email.unc.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                It has become a commonplace to declare that we are living through one of the
                    great epochs of human discovery. “The digital revolution.” The Internet as a
                    “fundamental and extensive force of change.” With the advent of the Internet as
                    a mode of communication and information discovery, we are leading lives, and
                    facing challenges undreamed of in previous generations except as the stuff of
                    science fiction. But what if it’s actually true? What if we are living through a
                    period as significant as the Renaissance or the Enlightenment? What if our
                    current circumstances are comparable to the Depression? Or the Post–war era? How
                    about the counter–culture revolution of the 60s? Each of these eras, great and
                    small, are marked, not only by their social upheavals, but also by their great
                    strides in artistic representation. The Renaissance had Michelangelo and
                    Leonardo; the Enlightenment had David and Ingres. In the modern era, we have
                    Frank Lloyd Wright, Piet Mondrian, Mark Rothko, Andy Warhol, Georgia O’Keeffe,
                    le Corbusier, Picasso, Matisse, and the list goes on and on. Great artists,
                    whose work helps us make sense of the past. Of course, we also have meaningful
                    contemporary art—but there’s a problem. Whereas we can still look at
                    Michelangelo’s paintings and sculptures, and in many cases, can look at
                    preliminary studies and drawings—we’re running the risk of loosing contemporary
                    art as soon as ten years after its creation
                The new media art community has recently come to the realization that the objects
                    and ideas of their most compelling thinkers and artists run the risk of
                    disappearing forever, because these objects are often in digital or other
                    variable formats, which tend to rapidly become, at best, inaccessible; and at
                    worst, irretrievably lost. Unless there is a systematic and persistent
                    exploration of preservation and archival procedures for these significant
                    cultural objects, they will, in all likelihood, not be accessible for future
                    generations of artists, scholars, or the general public. One of the new media
                    community’s most important advances towards this goal of systematic
                    investigation is the development of the “Archiving the Avant-Garde” project,
                    which brings together new media venues, curators, and artists to devise possible
                    solutions to this very difficult problem of the disappearing objects of the
                    avant-garde.
                There are three distinct challenges that the new media art community has to
                    confront. They must first assess the nature and goals of new media art in
                    general. It’s very difficult to preserve a nebulous “something,” especially if
                    that “something” is a complex series of digital objects with variable and
                    intricate relationships between parts and the whole, which also happens to
                    comment and feed off of a culture in which the conservator is currently living.
                    Unless the preserving agency has a convincing vision of what is intrinsically
                    important to maintain, the resulting objects run the risk of being inauthentic
                    and/or presenting an inaccurate indication of the artist’s intentions.
                It would also be prudent for this community to consider the current state of art
                    conservation and preservation in related fields. It’s important to recognize the
                    challenges and philosophical conflicts that art conservators of the last half
                    century have faced. No matter how cutting edge and exciting these new media
                    artifacts are, they are not being created in a vacuum, and conservators have
                    faced similar (although not digital) problems for hundreds of years. I will
                    specifically review methods of traditional art conservation, and how those
                    professionals are dealing with less stable forms like conceptual and performance
                    art.
                Finally, the community should recognize and reflect on the history of access and
                    preservation from an archival point of view. The project is, after all, called
                    “Archiving the Avant-Garde,” and there are some common tropes and methods within
                    the archival community, particularly the ideas of diplomatics and intrinsic
                    value, for example, that the new media art community might find helpful.
                Information technology professionals and humanist scholars have a responsibility
                    to keep the past alive. The information scientists provide the infrastructure
                    and methodologies, and the humanists provide the interpretive structure and deep
                    understanding from which future generations will gain insight into our
                    collective consciousness. Unless we begin working together, building systems
                    that grow naturally out of the scholarly tradition, rather than expecting the
                    scholarly tradition to twist itself into knots trying to fit within the current
                    Information Infrastructure, we will never be able to transcend the prosaic world
                    of subject headings and metadata elements. Information artists and the new media
                    art organizations are accomplishing, in the work itself, this very feat of
                    bringing together traditional forms of expression with new technologies. We
                    should take a lesson from them. We need to find a way to save and preserve the
                    richness of this experience for future generations.
            
        
    
