


    
        
            
                Orlando on the Web: From Development System to
                    Web-based Delivery of a Content-Encoded Textbase
                
                    
                        Patricia
                        Clements
                        
                            University of Alberta
                            Patricia.Clements@ualberta.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Renée
                        Elio
                        
                            University of Alberta
                            ree@cs.ualberta.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Sharon
                        Balazs
                        
                            University of Alberta
                            sbalazs@ualberta.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Susan
                        Brown
                        
                            University of Guelph
                            sbrown@uoguelph.ca
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Isobel
                        Grundy
                        
                            University of Alberta, with members of the Orlando
                                Project
                            Isobel.Grundy@ualberta.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    INTRODUCTION
                    The Orlando Project at the Universities of Alberta and Guelph aims to produce
                        the first full scholarly account of women’s writing in the British Isles in
                        a mode of literary history designed to take advantage of new technological
                        capabilities. To enable researchers to discover the sophisticated and
                        nuanced interconnections among this complex mass of material, Orlando has
                        produced a custom-designed SGML text encoding system capable of reflecting
                        literary and historical interpretation.
                    Aspects of this encoding scheme have been discussed in other forumsBrown, S., Fisher, S., Clements, P., Binhammer, K., Butler, T.,
                            Carter, K., Grundy, I., &amp; Hockey, S. (1998). “SGML and the
                            Orlando Project: Descriptive Markup for an Electronic History of Women’s
                            Writing”. Computers and the Humanities. 31,
                            271–85.,Butler, T., Fisher, S., Hockey, S., Coulombe,
                            G., Clements, P., Brown, S., Grundy, I., Carter, K., Harvey, K., Wood,
                            J. (2000). “Can a Team Tag Consistently? Experiences on the Orlando
                            Project”. Markup Languages Theory and Practice,
                            2, 111–125. and the ways in which the encoding scheme has, as
                        planned, turned out to be effective in supporting the identification of
                        novel and significant interrelationships in literary history has been
                            presentedGrundy, I., Clements, P., Brown, S., Butler, T.,
                            Cameron, R., Coulombe, G., Fisher, S., &amp; Wood, J. (2000). “Dates
                            and ChronStructs: Dynamic Chronology in the Orlando Project”. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 15,
                            265–289.,Brown, S., Grundy, I., et al. (2001). “Text
                            and Intertext in Electronic Documents.” Annual ALLC/ACH
                                Conference, New York, June 2001,Brown,
                            S., Grundy, I., et al. (2001). Session of three Orlando Project papers:
                            “The Hard and the Soft: Encoding Literary History,” “Risking
                            E-Race-Sure/Erasure: Encoding Cultural Formations,” and “The Anxiety of
                            Encoding: Intertextuality and Feminist Literary History.” Annual Digital Research in the Humanities Conference,
                                School of African and Oriental Studies, London University, UK, 9
                                July 2001. During its development, the use of the
                        Orlando textbase and its encoding scheme to explore such relationships has
                        been limited to the immediate research team, using the in-house Orlando
                        development tools. But the vision of the Orlando project is, of course, to
                        present its encoded textbase to the larger research community; i.e. to
                        create a web-based delivery system that researchers world-wide can use to
                        explore Orlando content. This presentation will take a systems view of the
                        Orlando Project, focusing on issues and methods that have arisen in
                        producing the first version of this delivery system
                    The three key aspects of this systems view, which will be outlined here, are:
                        (a) the in-house Orlando development environment, its tools, and the
                        decisions made in crafting this environment for the construction of the
                        textbase; (b) the definition and design of a prototype system to achieve
                        certain core, albeit limited, functionalities without precluding the later
                        design and implementation of a more powerful system; (c) general issues in
                        designing an interface that will lead novice users step by step to
                        exploiting at first a manageable selection from an integrated set of
                        literary historical materials and complex underlying encoding scheme, and so
                        by stages to fuller use of the potentialities of such a scheme. A
                        demonstration of the first version delivery system will both clarify and
                        concretise the issues discussed in the presentation.
                
                
                    IN-HOUSE SGML DEVELOPMENT ENVIRONMENT
                    In brief, the development environment supports the creation and ongoing
                        revision of the three components to the Orlando system. The first of these
                        is a textbase containing SGML documents for the biography and writing career
                        of each individual writer, and for historical topics and issues. The
                        biographical documents contain newly researched material on the lives,
                        backgrounds, and activities of women writers. The writing documents contain
                        newly researched material on literary careers, and the production, textual
                        features, and reception of texts. The topic documents contain newly
                        researched material under a range of headings deemed crucial for coverage.
                        The second component to the Orlando system is an Oracle database which holds
                        information on historical context: brief accounts of historical events and
                        processes chosen to reflect each period’s literary, cultural, and social
                        concerns, anchored to a date or date-range. The goal of this material is to
                        enable a user to produce a chronology—an ordered set of events—relating to
                        any particular time period, writer, word or concept. Sorting by event-type
                        or level of priority is an obvious use of this database. The third component
                        of the Orlando system is another Oracle database, which holds full
                        bibliographic details of all primary texts and secondary sources referred to
                        in the electronic text.
                    The investment in SGML necessitated using SGML-compatible software such as
                        Oracle in the development environment. The way in which this development
                        environment has in turn affected the development of the delivery system will
                        be outlined in a detailed chart.
                
                
                    DEFINING AND IMPLEMENTING A PROTOTYPE DELIVERY SYSTEM
                    The first Orlando delivery system had several goals. The primary goal was to
                        provide web-based access to most of the core Orlando materials (writing
                        documents, biographical documents, and events) to create chronologies and to
                        provide the first automated hyperlinks.
                    The SGML encoding scheme includes a number of tags by which materials in each
                        of these separate databases are related. For example, a
                        &lt;BIBCIT&gt; (bibliographic citation) tag that appears in a
                        writing, biography, topic or event prose refers, by means of unique
                        identifiers of records in the Oracle database, to complete bibliographic
                        material. Also in development is an SGML-tagged name authority list, which
                        not only ensures accurate hyperlinking (via the &lt;NAME&gt; tag)
                        across the various databases, but which also aids in search and
                        retrieval.
                    The prototype delivery system allows a user to access the Orlando material in
                        three primary ways: through a writer’s name, through event chronologies, and
                        through several thematic entry points. Given a writer’s name, the writer’s
                        biographical and writing documents are retrieved, and a chronology of events
                        mentioning that writer’s name is computed and displayed. Certain “core tags”
                        (name, place, date, title, organization name) act as hyperlinks to other
                        areas of the textbase. Users can also access Orlando material through event
                        chronologies generated by means of a freetext search on a given word/phrase,
                        or a search by tagged name, genre, title, place, or organization name. (For
                        these categories users are free to type in a search term or select from a
                        list of possibilities). Users can also specify a given time range, and/or
                        specify particular event types and/or priority levels. Thematic entry points
                        are a means of entering into Orlando by way of material that cuts across the
                        textbase in ways that highlight certain themes. “People” allows users to
                        find people by name, historical period, occupation, or what they wrote”;
                        “Texts” allows users to discover texts by title, subjects, or types of
                        writing”; “Contexts” allows users to search on various topics,
                        organizations, and places in women’s literary history; “Networks” allows
                        users to investigate literary, social or family connections, organizational
                        links or intertextual relations; and “Identities and Politics” allows users
                        to investigate cultural and political issues.
                    The full power of the Orlando system, of course, comes with sophisticated use
                        of its interpretative tags for information exploration, i.e., those tags
                        such as &lt;INTERTEXTUALITY&gt;, &lt;CULTURAL FORMATION&gt;,
                        &lt;RELATIONS WITH PUBLISHER&gt;, and &lt;POLITICS&gt;,
                        which the authors of documents have used to mark up text for literary
                        historical interpretation. However, for the first delivery system, issues
                        taking precedence were those related to working with extant web browsers and
                        XML software, those related to automating the transformation of SGML into
                        XML for web delivery as materials are moved from the development to the
                        delivery environment, and those concerning a first pass at a user interface
                        to what will ultimately be a powerful information exploration system (but
                        that will always need simpler ways in to be available). Orlando has taken a
                        modular approach to the definition, design, and implementation of its
                        delivery system and hence this first version did not fully exploit these
                        interpretative tags.
                
                
                    ON USER INTERFACE ISSUES FOR INFORMATION EXPLORATION
                    In the first version of a web-based delivery system, we aimed to follow good
                        user interface design principles. This involved, firstly, developing a
                        powerful yet usable interface that would allow both novice and expert users
                        to access Orlando materials. (For example, a novice user may choose to enter
                        directly through a writer’s name, whereas an expert user may choose to enter
                        through a more complex chronological search.) Secondly, this involved
                        revealing to the user a portion of the underlying interpretive scheme to
                        allow some exploitation of it. (For example, thematic entry points reveal to
                        the user some of the complexity of the Orlando interpretive scheme.)
                        Thirdly, this involved arriving at design principles and choices to create a
                        coherent display of the material. The paper will outline the ways in which
                        this process served as a foundation for the next stage of delivery work,
                        currently underway, which is focused on representing the interpretative
                        markup, and ensuring that the interface allows for maximum exploitation of
                        it. By conference time this next phase of delivery work will be completed in
                        its first instantiation and ready for demonstration.
                
                
                    CONCLUSION
                    This poster presentation will introduce the first version of the Orlando
                        delivery system, discuss in detail the progress that was made in the
                        creation of this system, and outline the ways in which it provided a basis
                        for subsequent delivery development.
                
            
        
    
