


    
        
            
                Web Prompts the Increase of Chinese Non-English Majors'
                    Speaking, Writing and Translating Abilities
                
                    
                        Yan
                        Tian
                        
                            School of Foreign Languages, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
                            maryyantian@yahoo.com
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                English is taught as a foreign language in China, which means there is no English
                    environment for students to get immersed in after class. However, English is a
                    compulsory course for Chinese college students. According to “The English
                    Syllabus for Non-English Majors”, students should be quite skilled at speaking,
                    writing and translating abilities. Yet non-English majors only have four periods
                    (180 minutes) of English classes every week from freshman year to sophomore
                    year. Teachers of English are supposed to be responsible for increasing
                    students’ productive skills (speaking, writing, and translating) as well as
                    their receptive skills (listening and reading). However, compared with their
                    receptive skills, their productive skills are rather poor despite the fact that
                    they can get high scores in various English tests. Therefore, teachers are
                    always at a loss as to how to increase students’ productive skills in and out of
                    class. Furthermore, there are usually 30~40 students in an English class, which
                    makes it almost impossible to carry on in-class activities. In view of the above
                    mentioned, the researcher turns to the Web for help.
                Based on a research project, this paper explores a new possibility of increasing
                    students’ productive skills. In previous teaching practices, students were only
                    interested in the designed activities aimed at increasing their productive
                    skills at the beginning of the semester. Then no matter how hard the teacher had
                    tried, they would have lost interest gradually as time went on. This is partly
                    due to their limited language proficiency and partly due to the low efficiency
                    of in-class activities. As a result, the students’ receptive skills are always
                    far better than their productive ones. In this project, the researcher takes the
                    advantage of the Web to arouse students’ interest in increasing their productive
                    skills.
                Web has a charm that almost no one can resist. Many students spend hours surfing
                    on the Web searching for information, sending emails, chatting with friends or
                    playing online games. Some even have Web sites of their own before they entered
                    the university. What’s more, a few have had the experience of establishing Web
                    sites for business companies.
                At Shanghai Jiao Tong University, all students live on campus and the computers
                    in their dormitories are all connected to the World Wide Web. Under this
                    circumstance, the researcher encouraged the students to establish their own
                    English learning Web site to demonstrate their progresses in their productive
                    skills.
                The subjects are 165 freshmen from Shanghai Jiao Tong University who enrolled in
                    the fall semester of 2002. They were assigned to four English classes before the
                    semester begun. In this project, students in each class were required to sign up
                    for at least one productive skill group, e.g. speaking group, writing group or
                    translating group, according to their own interest. Then each group was asked to
                    select one director taking charge of the group activities and one
                    assistant-director responsible for coordinating the group activities. They were
                    also asked to select five “computer engineers”. Those engineers were responsible
                    for the designing and maintaining of the Web site. Three of them were also
                    coordinators, contacting the speaking groups, the writing groups and the
                    translating groups of the four classes respectively. In order to guarantee
                    enough materials for the Web, each productive group was required to meet and
                    practice at least once a week and to report in class once a week about their
                    group activities.
                The students are very skilled at establishing World Wide Web. The main tools used
                    are Dreamweaver and Frontpage. The School of Foreign Languages at Shanghai Jiao
                    Tong University offered a server for this project. In one month, they
                    established their English learning Web, called “Cool English”. Since all the
                    dormitories are connected to the World Wide Web, students can easily visit their
                    Web site as well as the World Wide Web. At the beginning, there were only three
                    columns, namely Speaking, Writing and Translating on it. Each week, directors of
                    each group send, by emails, the “achievements” of their groups to the computer
                    engineers. After proof reading and checking technically, the computer engineers
                    uploaded those materials to their Web site#“Cool English”. They were very
                    excited at the beginning, but after a couple of weeks, the students were not
                    satisfied with the three columns at all. So they searched on the World Wide Web
                    for interesting materials and expanded the contents to include such columns as
                    “English News”, “English Idioms”, “English Jokes”, “Top Students’ Speeches on
                    English Study”, to name only a few. Besides, they also offered on their Web site
                    some other English learning Web sites for the students’ convenience.
                Although the Web site “Cool English” is still at its infancy, yet it has
                    attracted the attention of many students, including those from other classes.
                    Virtually in order to feed their Web site, the students have to surf on the
                    Internet, searching for useful and interesting information to enrich their Web
                    site constantly. In this process, their receptive skills, reading skill in
                    particular, have also been increased dramatically.
                From this project, the researcher comes to the conclusion that the Web has served
                    as a bridge between in-class activities and out-of-class activities and has
                    connected the receptive skills with the productive ones. Furthermore, it is a
                    faster, cheaper and fascinating “publishing house” for students. Their sense of
                    achievement has been greatly increased by working on the Internet.
            
        
    
