


    
        
            
                Beyond Taxonomy: Digital Poetics and the Problem of
                    Reading
                
                    
                        Talan
                        Memmott
                        
                            Brown University
                            talan@memmott.org
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                        (Talan Memmott is a hypermedia artist/writer/editor
                            from San Francisco, California. He is the Creative Director and Editor
                            of the online hypermedia literary journal BeeHive (). His hypermedia work
                            appears widely on the Internet. In 2001 he was awarded the trAce/Alt-X
                            New Media Writing Award for his work Lexia to
                                Perplexia, which also received honorable mention for the
                            Electronic Literature Organization’s award in fiction. He is a tutor for
                            the trAce Online Writing School, and has been a speaker, panelist,
                            reader and performer at various Conferences and Universities. He is
                            currently at Brown University as their first electronic writing graduate
                            fellow.)
                    
                
                
                    What is digital poetry? The definitions are decidedly nebulous.
                    The term digital poetry has been applied to a variety of creative literary
                        applications, from work developed in Flash and DHTML to MOO spaces and works
                        that utilize Perl. From cybertext to web art, digital poetry is somewhat
                        interchangeable with other terms used to describe what could be called
                        creative cultural practice through applied technology. We can agree that
                        digital poetry as hypermedia presents an expanded field of textuality that
                        moves writing beyond the word, toward a relationship between signs and sign
                        regimes, their integration, disintegration, and interaction one to another.
                        But, how these relationships are established in digital poetry is as diverse
                        and various as the practice itself.
                    The problems of developing any general typology, let alone taxonomy, are
                        hinted at in Espen Aarseth’s Cybertext: Perspectives on
                            Ergodic Literature. Aarseth puts forward a number of models for
                        the definition of various types of objects (buttons, actors, interactive,
                        controller, layout) within creative applications—including games,
                        interactive fiction, and hypertext. As the analysis expands, it is
                        discovered that these typologies breakdown when any given piece is viewed as
                        a whole. One moment a button may be a button, the next moment it may be an
                        actor; or, any given element may carry the attributes of any number of types
                        simultaneously.
                    Digital poetry does not properly define any specific type of expressive
                        object. Because of this there are many problems that emerge for the
                        reader/users of digital poetry and for those that deal critically with such
                        work. Lacking a definite object of study, we must begin to move away from
                        the idea of digital poetry as a genre toward an observation of applied
                        poetics within the digital environment—a poetics that is based in an
                        individual author’s engagement with media technologies, as scripted,
                        programmed and applied within a particular work.
                    Using Artaud’s The Theater and its Double as a
                        guide, this paper explores the mise en scène (or mise en screen) as a
                        potential model for the close reading of digital poetry. The paper looks at
                        a number of web-based digital poetry works that utilize a variety of
                        technologies to demonstrate how the network and its technologies play into
                        artist/writer intent to develop an applied poetics rather than poetry
                        proper.
                    Katherine Parrish’s Oulipo inspire web project
                            MOOlipo is examined for its creative use of MOO
                        technology to create a particpatory poetical space. In this work the user
                        particpates by inputting text, which is parsed and filtered under certain
                        rules to affect the output. The various rooms of the MOO have different
                        produce different effects. In one room a mesotic is created from user input,
                        in another room the word order of the input text is reversed.
                    Two other works that require user participation for the construction of
                        content will be examined. Lisa Jevbratt’s Syncro
                            Mail, a web-based mail service, requires that a user input the
                        email address of a second (perhaps unknowing) ‘user’. Through this process,
                        the second ‘user’ receives a random image and a random word in their email.
                        This piece uses perl scripting for its functionality and presents a unique,
                        if not mysterious method of poetic emergence. In the delivered email there
                        is no explanation as to the relevance or connection of image to word, nor
                        any indication of how, or where the mail originated. The connections, the
                        poetry must be made by this second ‘user’, independent of any knowledge of
                        the process. Another project with much more immediate participatory poetic
                        results is You and We, a collaboration of Seb
                        Chevrel and Gabe Kean. You and We allows users to
                        upload images and short texts. Using a combination of Flash and Macromedia
                        Generator, the images and texts are randomly compiled in a somewhat
                        cinematic, MTV-like display complete with music. Within seconds of uploading
                        an image or text, it is incorporated into the collection. As of November
                        10th, 2002 there had been over 1,500 images uploaded and nearly 5,000
                        texts.
                    Additional works to be examined include; Brian Kim Stefans’ The Dreamlife of Letters for its use of letterist animation,
                        and a couple of “codeworks” by Ted Warnell—VIRU2
                        and BERLIOZ—for their elegance and simplicity of
                        interface as well as their transparency. Warnell’s work allows the functions
                        of code to play into the applied poetics of his work, at the surface. In
                            VIRU2 the actual code that drives the piece is
                        made viewable as screenal text. The exposure of code at the surface and the
                        integration of functionality, aesthetics and poetics in Warnell’s work
                        emphasizes the role of technology and an individuated ecounter with media in
                        establishing what is inferred by the term digital poetry as well as applied
                        poetics.
                    Rather than work from a model that hopes for a close reading through the
                        abstraction of words from their media-rich environment, this paper proposes
                        that critics and readers take a more choragraphic (to borrow a term from
                        Gregory Ulmer) approach to reading that observes the entirety of a work—from
                        interface design to interactivity, the written word and code—as something of
                        a micro-cultural statement. By examining digital poetry objects as a whole
                        we may begin to recognize how each work presents an individuated applied
                        poetics and move away from overreaching taxonomic designations.
                    This paper also proposes that more critical work be developed in hypermedia
                        environments as a way of diminishing critical/theoretical detachment from
                        the realities of creative digital practice.
                
            
        
    
