


    
        
            
                Creating a Virtual Center as an International Web-Based
                    Interactive Infrastructure for Research and Teaching in the Language Sciences: A
                    new Research and Library collaboration.
                
                    
                        María
                        Blume
                        
                            Cornell University
                            mb48@cornell.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Elaine
                        Westbrooks
                        
                            Cornell University
                            elw25@cornell.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Cliff
                        Crawford
                        
                            Cornell University
                            cjc26@cornell.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        James
                        Gair
                        
                            Cornell University
                            jwg2@cornell.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Tina
                        Ogden
                        
                            The Ogden Consulting Group
                            tina@tinaogdtina@tinaogden.com
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Barbara
                        Lust
                        
                            Cornell University
                            bcl4@cornell.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                We describe here the web-based Virtual Center for the Study of Language
                    Acquisition (VCSLA) now under development at Cornell University as a close
                    collaboration between the Cornell Language Acquisition Laboratory (CLAL),
                    Cornell's Albert Mann Library and a set of national and international
                    partners.
                The purpose of this center is to foster and facilitate active and continuing
                    interactive research on shared data involving many different languages. Taking
                    advantage of the potentialities of the web, we bring together in a truly
                    interactive way the expertise of researchers at CLAL and that of others at a
                    number of scattered institutions, with the experience and capabilities of the
                    library in information technology applied to storage of and access to shared
                    data
                This first stage of development, financed by an NSF Planning Grant, has a number
                    of crucial features, described here, that in assembly make it an innovative
                    creation that may also serve, as both an ongoing enterprise in language
                    acquisition research and a model for other fields as well.
                
                    1. While centered in CLAL, the VCSLA involves the active participation of
                        national and international researchers at other institutions, incorporating
                        a multi-directional flow of information and a perpetual linkage to the
                        library.
                    2. It incorporates the Virtual Linguistic Lab (VLL), a new web-based
                        interface for data transcription, analysis and access. This interface serves
                        as a common but flexible framework for data entry and access in an
                        interactive manner. This is well under development, and designed to be
                        applicable to both research and teaching.
                    3. The enterprise embodied is cross-linguistic, including data and
                        research on a widely spread set of languages that will be constantly
                        augmented. VLL furnishes a detailed framework, assuring cross-language
                        comparability, and facilitating both entry and access. It will include the
                        considerable resources amassed in CLAL, and that provided by the
                        participants physically located elsewhere. Thus it will necessarily be under
                        constant revision as information flows in both directions.
                    4. The presence of the Mann Library in VCSLA is a special and unique
                        element of its design. Mann Library brings its considerable expertise in the
                        areas of data preservation, data archiving, and metadata management into
                        force on the goals of the enterprise. This effort is consistent with the
                        Cornell Library’s long standing active commitment to outreach activities
                        that more firmly engage the library into faculty research and instruction in
                        non-traditional ways, including several of its current digital and Virtual
                        Library initiatives (See for example, “Reinventing the Humanities: Cornell
                        Librarians and Faculty Members Create Electronic Collaborations”, Cornell Library READ!, Winter 2002).
                    5. The cooperative effort with the library is crucial to the functioning
                        of VCSLA. Among other things, it links the VCSLA to the Open Language
                        Archives Community (OLAC), an international partnership of institutions and
                        individuals who are creating a worldwide virtual library of language
                        resources, by agreeing to use The OLAC Metadata Set (OLACMS), a set of
                        metadata elements for describing language resources. This component thus
                        extends the informational and accessibility resources of the VCSLA.The
                        OLACMS Standard uses XML to represent metadata descriptions, and metadata
                        librarians at Mann are engaged in making the Cornell Language Acquisition
                        Lab and associated VCSLA a metadata provider as well as a service provider
                        within OLAC. That is, the library has built the infrastructure that allows
                        the CLAL to share its metadata with other OLAC participants and it also has
                        provided the interface that allows CLAL to harvest the metadata from other
                        OLAC participants.
                    6. There are in existence other forms of electronic data sharing for child
                        language research, notably CHILDES (Carnegie Mellon). VCSLA differs from and
                        is complementary to these in both scope and design, most notably in the
                        incorporation of the VLL format for comparability of data entry and access,
                        and in its essential interactive component. That is, it does not represent
                        simply a databank that allows researchers to access and enter data, but a
                        facility that allows interactive and cooperative communication and research
                        by active scholars who are physically separated by location. It is also
                        designed to be a useful element in the training of students, especially
                        potential researchers in language acquisition Also, as an International
                        Web-Based Interactive Infrastructure, it is designed to incorporate new
                        participants and laboratories worldwide, including areas and countries where
                        resources for training and research in the field are limited or nonexistent.
                    
                
                In our presentation we will sketch each of the above components of the VCSLA and
                    its progress to date. We present concrete examples of its applications to both
                    research and teaching in the language sciences.
            
        
    
