


    
        
            
                Virtual Vaudeville: A Live Performance Simulation
                    System
                
                    
                        David
                        Saltz
                        
                            University of Georgia
                            saltz@arches.uga.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    THE PROBLEM: REPRESENTING AND ARCHIVING LIVE PERFORMACE
                    Manuscripts, paintings, sculptures, films, and recordings are artifacts that
                        can be preserved and archived for subsequent generations to appreciate and
                        analyze. Live theatre, however, is ephemeral. Is it possible to archive a
                        live performance? One can use film or videotape to document a present-day
                        performance, and, with some creative interpretation and speculation, to
                        recreate a performance from the past. But films and videotapes are incapable
                        of conveying the experience of attending a live performance. A filmed
                        performance offers only a single perspective on the action: the camera
                        decides exactly where to look at each moment. Spectators at a live event, by
                        contrast, act as their own camera operators, selecting their own point of
                        focus—which may not even be on stage. Films omits a vital dimension of live
                        performance: the viewer’s immersion in the world of the theater, and the
                        crucial role that the community of spectators plays in constituting a
                        performance event.
                    The underlying problem here extends beyond the theatrical performance.
                        Precisely the same challenges arise with any kind of performative event,
                        such as dance performances, rituals, political congresses, coronations,
                        parades, festivals, battles, riots, etc.
                    One strategy to address this problem has been to build a physical
                        reconstruction of an historic structure and to stage performances in it, as
                        has been done, for example, with the Globe Theatre in London and with
                        numerous structures in Colonial Williamsburg in Virginia. This solution
                        requires an extraordinary, continuing investment of money and land, and so
                        is feasible only in a very limited number of cases. Moreover, such physical
                        reconstructions are available only to people at one geographic location and
                        implement only one interpretation, and so they cannot be used to evaluate
                        conflicting scholarly interpretations of the historical evidence. Perhaps
                        the deepest problem with such historical constructions is that, while
                        painstaking efforts may be undertaken to achieve historical accuracy in the
                        physical environment, performers and perhaps even the support personnel, the
                        audience itself—and so, ultimately, the context of reception—remains
                        resolutely contemporary.
                
                
                    OUR SOLUTION: THE LIVE PERFORMACE SIMULATION SYSTEM
                    In January of 2002, I began work as Principle Investigator on a project
                        designed to address this problem: “A Live Performance Simulation System:
                        Virtual Vaudeville.” Our strategy is to recreate historical performances in
                        a virtual reality environment. Virtual Vaudeville is, in effect, a
                        single-user 3D computer game that allows users to enter a virtual theatre to
                        watch a simulated performance. The objective is to reproduce a feeling of
                        “liveness” in this environment: the sensation of being surrounded by human
                        activity onstage, in the audience and backstage, and the ability to choose
                        where to look at any given time (onstage or off) and to move within the
                        environment. A vital concern is to find a way to bring the nuances of great
                        stage performances into this virtual environment. To this end, we are using
                        optical motion and facial capture technology to capture real-world
                        performances by professional, highly skilled actors, singers, dancers,
                        acrobats and musicians.
                    This three-year project is supported by a $900,000 grant from the National
                        Science Foundation, supplemented by an additional $110,000 from the State of
                        Georgia. I am leading a team of researchers from seven universities,
                        including the University of Georgia, the University of Pittsburgh, Georgia
                        Tech and the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, that includes historians
                        specializing in nineteenth century American theatre, music and culture,
                        computer scientists specializing in high-performance 3D game design, and
                        theatre practitioners.
                    Our long-term goal to develop a flexible set of techniques and technologies
                        that scholars and theatre practitioners can use to simulate a wide range of
                        performance traditions, from Classical Greece to Japanese Noh. Our
                        short-term objective is to complete a fully-functional simulation of
                        nineteenth century American vaudeville theatre.
                
                
                    VAUDEVILLE
                    American vaudeville an especially apt test case for Live Performance
                        Simulation. Vaudeville was the most popular form of entertainment in the
                        United States from the 1880s through the 1920s, functioning in its day much
                        as television does today. Many vaudeville acts both reflected and helped to
                        constitute the enthusiasms and anxieties of their time, especially those
                        concerning the integration of new immigrant groups into mainstream American
                        culture. Consequently a rich simulation of a vaudeville performance will be
                        a useful resource, not just for those interested in theatre history, but for
                        scholars and students of American history generally.
                    A vaudeville performance was divided into many short, self-contained
                        segments. A typical vaudeville bill encompassed a wide variety of acts—
                        contortionist performances, dance numbers, juggling acts, singing groups,
                        comic monologues, blackface comedy, condenses versions of full-length
                        plays—with particular acts in the lineup appealing differently to different
                        groups in the audience. Consequently, simulating different acts of a
                        vaudeville show and exploring the likely responses of different groups of
                        spectators opens up for historical investigation a wide range of ethnic,
                        gender, class, and racialized interactions during America's industrial
                        age.
                    Our simulated performance takes place in B.F. Keith’s Union Square Theatre, a
                        typical Vaudeville house seating approximately 2000 spectators, in the year
                        1895, fifteen years after the first Vaudeville theatre opened in New York.
                        We are recreating four of the most popular and representative acts on the
                        vaudeville circuit during that time: (1) the strongman Sandow the
                        Magnificant; (2) the Irish singer Maggie Cline; (3) the comic “stage Jew”
                        Frank Bush; and (4) the sketch comedy of the four Cohans, whose youngest
                        member, George M. Cohan, went on to become one of the great stars of early
                        twentieth century Broadway. As we approach the end of our first year of work
                        on the project, have completed archival research into all of these acts and
                        are creating the models and motion-capturing the performances. Our
                        presentation will feature a demonstration of significant portions of the
                        Sandow act that as of this writing are complete and fully-functional.
                
                
                    DESIGN
                    Virtual Vaudeville allows the user to switch between two very different ways
                        of experiencing the simulated performances. In what we call “invisible
                        camera” mode, viewers fly through the 3D space to observe the performance
                        from any position in the theatre and zoom in as close to the performers as
                        they please.
                    Alternatively, the viewer can adopt an embodied perspective, watching the
                        performance through the eyes of a particular member of the audience. Virtual
                        Vaudeville allows the viewer to select one of four spectators, each
                        representing a different socio-economic group in 19th century America: (1)
                        Mrs. Dorothy Shopper, a wealthy socialite attending the performance with her
                        young daughter; (2) Mr. Luigi Calzilaio, an Italian immigrant fresh off the
                        boat, attending the performance with his more Americanized brother; (3) Mr.
                        Jake Spender, a young “sport” sitting next to a Chorus Girl (with him he may
                        or may not strike up a relationship, depending on the viewer’s choices); and
                        (4) Miss Lucy Teacher, an African American schoolteacher watching the
                        performance with her boyfriend from the second balcony, where she is
                        confined by the theatre’s segregation policy.
                    Viewers can switch between any of the avatars at any time, and can move the
                        avatar’s head to focus on different areas of the stage or auditorium, and
                        can trigger a limited set of avatar responses, for example applauding or
                        laughing. Some of these responses are verbal, such as cracking a joke or
                        heckling the performance. In these cases, the viewer selects only the
                        generic response type, and the system produces a specific response
                        appropriate what is happening onstage and off, taking into account the
                        viewer’s previous interactions with other members of the virtual audience.
                        Because the surrounding spectators respond interactively to the viewer's
                        avatar, each viewer has a different experience of the performance event.
                    
                
                
                    SIGNIFICANCE
                    Virtual Vaudeville offers scholars in all disciplines in the humanities a
                        model for a new kind of “critical edition.” A conventional published
                        monograph can pick and choose details to examine, and so lacuna and even
                        contradictions in the historical analysis are easy to overlook. The
                        imperative of precisely recreating both on-stage and off-stage events will
                        demand an unprecedented degree of scholarly thoroughness and rigor.
                    
                    Key to our project is the depth of the collaboration between technology,
                        scholarship, pedagogy and art. This project is conceived to make a
                        significant contribution to all four domains simultaneously, rather than
                        merely using any one in the service of the others. The end result, we, hope,
                        will represent an important advance in the design and implementation of
                        virtual environments, building on recent successes in creating
                        photo-realistic simulations of real 3D environments by introducing a large
                        quantity of complex human performance data. It will constitute an invaluable
                        work of applied scholarship, an unprecedented resource for visualizing past
                        performances and testing hypotheses about historical performance practices.
                        It will provide an unprecedented resource for students to engage with
                        historical performance traditions as performance (and not as literature or
                        film). Finally, from an artistic perspective, the Virtual Vaudeville project
                        will test the potential of virtual reality technology to provide truly
                        nuanced and engaging theater experiences.
                
            
        
    
