


    
        
            
                Theory in Text Encoding
                
                    
                        Paul
                        Caton
                        
                            Scholarly Technology Group, Brown University
                            Paul_Caton@brown.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The existing body of theoretical work in text encoding suffers from two
                    interrelated problems: firstly, confusion over the specific nature of the work;
                    and secondly, the absence of any truly critical theory.
                Theory’s purest signified and a fundamental predicate of progress in the natural
                    sciences involves a representation that meets discursively bounded criteria of
                    “truth.” According to Renear (1997) the electronic document encoding and
                    processing community “has evolved a rich body of illuminating theory about the
                    nature of text” (107), a claim that expands that of Renear, Durand, and Mylonas
                    (1996) and anticipates Mylonas and Renear (1999) who assert the principal goal
                    of the research community that develops and applies the TEI Guidelines and other
                    text markup schemes is a greater “theoretical
                    understanding of textual representation” (my emphasis). In making their case the
                    authors invoke Lakatosian criteria which they confidently pronounce (some
                    disclaimers notwithstanding) this research community’s work meets. Yet the
                    development of OHCOs 1-through-3, for example—surely one of text encoding’s
                    founding “theoretical” moments— demonstrably fails to qualify as a progressive
                    problemshift in Lakatosian terms.I omit the argument of proof here
                        for brevity.
                Text encoding has not generated a rich body of illuminating theory because it
                    cannot. Asking, for example, “what is text, really?” already poses the wrong
                    question because it assumes an undiscovered essence the encoding community can
                    find with a progressive research program. This will not happen because no
                    mysterious core exists whose explanation falls to home-grown text encoding
                    theory. Renear argues that despite falsification of all OHCO variants there is
                    nevertheless “no reason to give up the common-sense view that texts do have an
                    objective structure independent of our methods and theories about them” (1997,
                    122). Structure there may be, but discovering it is not like positing the
                    double-helix of DNA; we need not strive to understand-by-modelling because of
                    inadequate observational technology or limited knowledge. Praxis prompts
                    reflection which generates principle to guide subsequent praxis. Poetry, for
                    example, shows a self-conscious praxis continually reviewing, refining, and
                    codifying (prescriptively) its methodology,In the
                        hyper-self-consciousness of artistic praxis prescription inevitably invites
                        its own negation—though anti-prescription is arguably still a
                        principle. and this is as true of its encoding as its writing. Out of
                    “successful” text encoding praxis comes not theory but principle.See, for example, the Women Writers Project’s online guide for marking up
                        line groups. ()
                This is to say not that text encoding has no theoretical component but that
                    pursuing the theory behind a principle takes us to another place: to linguistics
                    or rhetoric or semiotics or the cognitive psychology of visual perception, and
                    so on. Such pursuits can produce sophisticated and thought-provoking borrowings
                    that unquestionably enrich the literature, but these are the exception, not the
                        rule.Recent productive borrowings include Buzzetti’s from Hjelmslevian Semiotics (1999); Renear’s from Austin’s
                            Speech Act Theory (2000); and Piez’s from
                            Traditional Rhetoric (2001). In
                    particular, scholarly work in text encoding rarely positions itself with respect
                    to work in modern literary/cultural theory, and even more rarely does it use
                    text encoding as a springboard for a sustained engagement with such theory. This
                    seems to me a significant and unfortunate absence, a product both of text
                    encoding’s desire to differentiate itself as a specific field of intellectual
                    inquiry and of a positivist, utilitarian bias against the perceived negativity
                    and self-imprisoning reflexivity of contemporary theory. Renear’s narrative of
                    the development of text encoding theory exemplifies the latter stance with its
                    Realist/Anti-realist distinction, associating the former with common-sense and
                    characterizing the latter as “consistent with post-structuralist epistemologies”
                    (122). This imitates an exclusionary move Zavarzadeh and Morton (1991) identify
                    in literary studies: positing deconstruction as the boundary of theory beyond
                    which it is unthinkable to go because (supposedly) deconstruction represents the
                    limits of the thinkable, the point where theory swallows itself in absolute
                    relativism. Ironically, Renear’s account positions itself precisely as
                    theoretically reflexive while exposing its own refusal of genuine
                    reflexivity.
                Text encoding—indeed humanities computing as a whole—can too easily think of
                    itself as related to every humanities discipline but also marginal or even
                    external to all of them. This licenses attitudes such as Renear’s contention
                    that what he calls text encoding theory brings “a much needed fresh perspective
                    on textuality” (107), as if text encoding occupied a different space from
                    traditional disciplines. Contrarily I would argue that whatever its origins in
                    non-academic praxes, text encoding forms itself in
                    and of humanities disciplines. I should stress that
                    I do not consider these disciplines stable sites: they can and should be
                    challenged. Text encoding therefore offers a locus for work that tries to think
                    through the tensions, contradictions, and faultlines that constitute those
                    disciplines qua humanities disciplines. However,
                    unless it can stand on sufficiently equal terms to enter a critical dialogue
                    with theory of exemplary reflexivity and philosophical rigor, the text encoding
                    community’s theoretical work will have limited significance and appeal—a fate
                    already shared by much of the humanities computing literature (Corns 1991;
                    Warwick 1999). My own position is that the historical materialism that comes
                    down to us from Marx, enriched and updated by thinkers such as Lenin, Adorno,
                    Althusser, and many others, offers us the best critical tools for a dialectical
                    engagement with what it means to encode texts in the humanities. Althusser
                    (1982) memorably describes the problem:
                        Left to itself, a spontaneous (technical) practice produces only the
                            “theory” it needs as a means to produce the ends assigned to it: this
                            “theory” is never more than the reflection of this end, uncriticized,
                            unknown, in its means of realization, that is, it is a by-product of the reflection of the technical
                            practice’s end on its means. A “theory” which does not question the end
                            whose by-product it is remains a prisoner of
                            this end and of the “realities” which have imposed it as an end.
                        (171, emphasis in original)
                    
                Currently a prisoner of its pragmatic roots, theoretical work on text encoding
                    has only its chains to lose.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Louis
                                    Althusser
                                
                            
                            For Marx
                            First published in French, 1963. Translated by Ben
                                Brewster.
                            
                                London
                                Verso
                                1982
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Dino
                                    Buzzetti
                                
                            
                            Text Representation and Textual Models
                        
                        
                            Paper presented at ACH/ALLC 1999, June 1999, University
                                of Virginia
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Paul
                                    Caton
                                
                            
                            Towards a Politics of Text Encoding
                        
                        
                            Paper presented at ACH/ALLC 2001, June 2001, New York
                                University
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    Corns
                                
                            
                            Applications in the Study of English Literature
                        
                        
                            Literary and Linguistic Computing
                            
                                6
                                2
                                127-30
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Elli
                                    Mylonas
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    H.
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            The Text Encoding Initiative at 10: Not Just an
                                Interchange Format Anymore—But a New Research Community
                        
                        
                            Computers and the Humanities
                            
                                33
                                1-2
                                1-9
                                April 1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Wendell
                                    Piez
                                
                            
                            Beyond the ‘Descriptive vs. Procedural’
                                Distinction
                        
                        
                            Paper presented at Extreme Markup Languages 2001,
                                August 2001, Montreal
                            
                                
                                
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    H.
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            Out of Praxis: Three (Meta)Theories of
                                Textuality
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Kathryn
                                    Sutherland
                                
                            
                            Electronic Text: Investigations in Method and
                                Theory
                            
                                Oxford
                                Oxford University Press
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Allen
                                    H.
                                    Renear
                                
                            
                            “The Descriptive/Procedural Distinction is
                                Flawed
                        
                        
                            Paper presented at Extreme Markup Languages 2000,
                                August 2000, Montreal
                            
                                
                                
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Claire
                                    Warwick
                                
                            
                            English Literature, Electronic Text, and Computer
                                Analysis: an Impossible Combination?
                        
                        
                            Paper presented at ACH/ALLC 1999, June 1999, University
                                of Virginia
                            
                                
                                
                                1999
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Mas’ud
                                    Zavarzadeh
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Donald
                                    Morton
                                
                            
                            Theory, (Post)Modernity, Opposition: An “Other”
                                Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory
                            PostModern Positions
                            
                                Vol. 5
                                Washington D.C
                                Maisonneuve Press
                                1991
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
