


    
        
            
                Annotation and Electronic Scholarly Editions
                
                    
                        Chris
                        Tiffin
                        
                            Univ of Queensland
                            c.tiffin@uq.edu.au
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Graham
                        Barwell
                        
                            Univ of Wollongong
                            g.barwell@uow.edu.au
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Phill
                        Berrie
                        
                            Australian Defence Force Academy
                            p.berrie@adfa.edu.au
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Paul
                        Eggert
                        
                            Australian Defence Force Academy
                            p.eggert@adfa.edu.au
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                This paper considers the purpose of annotation in scholarly editions and the
                    methods by which annotation should be provided in the electronic
                    environment.
                There is a consensus that the most important task in scholarly editing is to
                    prepare an accurate and reliable text, according to transparent criteria. The
                    second task is to supplement that text with apparatus to enable the modern
                    reader to read it more adequately. While some of the more influential guides to
                    editing procedure (Center for Editions on American Authors, Committee for
                    Scholarly Editions) suggest that annotation will not in all cases be required,
                    the annotative process can be high on the list of editor’s satisfactions and may
                    therefore be accorded disproportionate effort. As Mary-Jo Kline reports, some of
                    the volumes in such magisterial series as the Jefferson Davis Papers and the
                    Madison Papers were criticised for the “plague” of overannotation. Any General
                    Editor must quickly learn stealthy strategies for restraining the annotative
                    enthusiasms of contributors.
                The process of footnoting or annotating in the presentation of an edited text has
                    a different role from the one it does in works of literary critical commentary.
                    On a critic’s page the primary end of the annotation is to provide the
                    evidentiary basis for the commentator’s assertions and argument, or, in one
                    lurid account, to fight turf wars about academic status with other scholars
                    (McFarland 1991). We concentrate here, however, on the principles and practice
                    of annotating the primary text in a scholarly edition.
                The purpose of annotation is usually framed with the reader in mind. It may be
                    based idealistically on “render[ing] the author’s meaning wholly intelligible”
                    (Battestin 1981), or it may be based on the attempt to provide the modern reader
                    with the information that would have been possessed by a reader on first
                    publication. In the case of unpublished works, it may translate a general reader
                    into an essentially private world. There is often a strong injunction that
                    annotation should not be subjective or judgmental (CEAA, Hewett 1996). In
                    practice, a further aim may be to present the accretion of scholarly knowledge
                    and interpretation of the text up to the present (Ricks 1989)
                Annotation in the print mode is arranged in a number of different ways: textual
                    or explanatory notes at the foot of the page, notes at the end of the chapter or
                    book, collations, glossaries, appendices, and “excursus notes” (McFarland
                    1991).
                For reasons of cost, electronic editions can offer much richer annotation than
                    print editions, and targeted parts of this extra material can be made accessible
                    from precise points in the text. Two important questions arise, though: how
                    should this ancillary material be arranged, and how should it be linked, or
                    rather, how should its availability be signaled from within the text?
                One system, used especially by publications like journals that have both a print
                    and a web publication, is to follow closely the endnotes practice used in print
                    publications by offering the notes in a single file and signaling them by a
                    numerical footnote indice. Other editions indicate the presence of the
                    annotative note by a marginal indice (e.g. Thomas Gray Archive), by highlighting
                    the span of text to which the note refers, or by enabling the highlighting of
                    the text span through a mouseover to reveal the presence of the link.
                Some of the most spectacular scholarly editing projects of the last decade such
                    as the Rossetti Archive and the Blake Archive situate their texts in such a
                    complex environment that the annotative strategy of immediate explication of
                    individual terms in texts is abandoned in favor of more serious immersion in the
                    contexts of the poems. Paradoxically, though, under this system precise
                    assistance is not always available to the reader.
                In the electronic edition of His Natural Life developed by the Authenticated
                    Editions Project at its JITM website, we commenced with the list of annotations
                    in a flat file transferred as legacy data from the printed Academy Edition of
                    this text, and highlighted the text spans which were indicated in the lead-ins
                    to the print edition’s endnotes. But this seemed to make poor use of the
                    amplitude and precision offered by the markup scheme of the electronic edition.
                    Accordingly, we have analysed the content of the notes and reformatted them
                    according to type into sub-glossaries. The result constitutes in itself a
                    critical approach to the text.
                Signaling the presence of annotations has been rethought in the light of the
                    expected readership of the electronic version, and this has led to the provision
                    of greater density of annotation links. However, providing for multitudinous
                    non-sequential reading patterns can easily produce an absurdly over-linked text
                    when the names of recurrent characters, places or motifs are annotated. This
                    latter problem can be alleviated if users have a mechanism for enabling or
                    suppressing the link indicators themselves.
                We conclude that different strategies are required for the arrangement and
                    announcement of annotative material in the electronic environment from the print
                    one, but the major determinant of how annotations are to be arranged and offered
                    (and perhaps still the most difficult thing to judge) is how readers will
                    approach the edition.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Authenticated Editions Project
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Martin
                                    C.
                                    Battestin
                                
                            
                            A Rationale of Literary Annotation
                        
                        
                            Studies in Bibliography
                            
                                34
                                
                                1-22
                                1981
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Marcus
                                    Clarke
                                
                            
                            His Natural Life
                            The Academy Editions of Australian Literature
                            
                                
                                    Lurline
                                    Stuart
                                
                            
                            
                                (St Lucia, Qld
                                University of Queensland Press
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Richard
                                    Furuta
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Eduardo
                                    Urbina
                                
                            
                            “On the Characteristics of Scholarly
                                Annotations
                        
                        
                            HT02, June 11-15
                            
                                
                                
                                2002
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Ralph
                                    HannaIII
                            
                            Annotation as Social Practice
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Stephen
                                    A.
                                    Barney
                                
                            
                            Annotation and Its Texts
                            
                                New York
                                Oxford University Press
                                1991
                                178-84
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    David
                                    Hewitt
                                 et al 
                            The Edinburgh Edition of the Waverley Novels: A Guide
                                for Editors
                            
                                Edinburgh
                                
                                1996
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Mary-Jo
                                    Kline
                                
                            
                            A Guide to Documentary Editing
                            
                                Baltimore
                                Johns Hopkins University Press
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Thomas
                                    McFarland
                                
                            
                            Who Was Benjamin Whichcote? Or The Myth of
                                Annotation
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Stephen
                                    A.
                                    Barney
                                
                            
                            Annotation and Its Texts
                            
                                New York
                                Oxford University Press
                                1991
                                152-77
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Jerome
                                    McGann
                                
                            
                            Textual Scholarship, Textual Theory, and the Uses of
                                Electronic Tools: A Brief Report on Current Undertakings
                        
                        
                            Victorian Studies
                            
                                41
                                
                                609-19
                                1998
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Modern Language Association of America. Committee
                                    on Scholarly Editions
                            
                            MLA Guidelines for Electronic Scholarly
                                Editions
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Modern Language Association of America. Committee
                                    on Scholarly Editions
                            
                            Draft Revised MLA Guidelines for Electronic Scholarly
                                Editions
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christopher
                                    Ricks
                                
                            
                            The Poems of Tennyson
                            
                                3 vols.
                                Harlow, Essex
                                Longman
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Rossetti Archive
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                    Michael
                                    Suarez
                                S.J.
                            In Dreams Begins Responsibility: Novels, Promises and
                                the Electronic Editor
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Alexander
                                    Pettit
                                
                            
                            Textual Studies and the Common Reader
                            
                                Athens, Georgia
                                University of Georgia Press
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Thomas Gray Archive
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Uncle Tom’s Cabin and American Culture
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        Website. 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            William Blake Archive
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
