


    
        
            
                The Suda On Line: Applying Computer Technology to
                    Ancient and Byzantine Studies
                
                    
                        Ross
                        Scaife
                        
                            U of Kentucky
                            scaife@uky.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Raphael
                        Finkel
                        
                            U of Kentucky
                            raphael@cs.uky.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Using highly interdisciplinary methods we have built a collaborative
                    infrastructure for translation and annotation of ancient texts. This
                    generalizable infrastructure is now fully deployed in the Suda On Line ). The Suda is a 10th century Byzantine
                    Greek lexicon of some 30,000 lemmata. After four years of continuous development
                    we have implemented a complex yet effective and practical system. Our goal is
                    not only to provide the SOL as a useful tool for researchers, but also to
                    explore and facilitate the modes of scholarship now made possible by open source
                    technology and the internet: this effort is cooperative rather than solitary,
                    communal rather than proprietary, worldwide rather than localized, evolving
                    rather than static. Our international team of managing editors, editors, and
                    translators has now worked up approximately one third of the material in the
                    Suda, quite a satisfactory rate of progress. ACH/ALLC in Glasgow had an initial
                    presentation concerning this project; we feel that substantial further
                    development and our positive results warrant an update at this time.
                In order to encourage the participation of translators and editors, and in order
                    to make the SOL database a useful scholarly resource as quickly as possible, we
                    make our materials available to users as soon as it is submitted. We acknowledge
                    that this philosophy raises concerns. One of the major issues with electronic
                    publication of scholarship is the potential it has for circumventing time-tested
                    procedures for quality control. While we do not want simply to add to the sea of
                    uncontrolled material on the Web, at the same time we insist on our right to
                    experiment, and we have no desire to replicate the print-publication paradigm in
                    electronic format. Many of the advantages that electronic publication offers,
                    including immediacy, accessibility and adaptability, are seriously handicapped
                    by traditional editorial processes, where chronic bottlenecks frequently develop
                    in the effort to keep the publishing house’s imprimatur off of anything with any
                    detectable shortcomings. In order to exploit these advantages of the web while
                    at the same time maintaining a reasonable level of quality control, submissions
                    to the SOL database undergo the following process of editorial evaluation and monitoring:
                        1. Initial submissions immediately become accessible to users
                            searching or browsing at the SOL site, but their “draft” status is
                            clearly marked.
                        2. Once a submission has been carefully vetted by one of the SOL
                            editors for errors and significant omissions, its status as part of the
                            SOL database may rise from draft into one of two categories: low or
                            high. At every stage of this process, the editors who participate in
                            vetting and improving the entry will be prominently identified to the
                            user, along with any descriptive comments they may provide concerning
                            their editorial work.
                        3. Most importantly, even an entry that has achieved high status will
                            not be considered perfect and immutable. At the discretion of the
                            editors, improvements, changes and additions of links and bibliography
                            can continue indefinitely.
                    
                While this way of doing things puts more of the burden of quality control on the
                    end user, our system of marking editorial status gives researchers significant
                    assistance in coming to an informed decision about the reliability of the
                    material in SOL. In fact, our system offers definite advantages over the
                    canonical paradigm of peer review from the consumer’s point of view. In print
                    scholarship (and electronic scholarship that merely follows the traditional
                    model) the number, identity, and qualifications of reviewers remain hidden, and
                    one must usually base one’s estimate of the reliability of the scholarship
                    solely on the identity of the author and the general reputation of the venue. In
                    the standard paradigm, moreover, the end product is more or less fixed, whereas
                    our database is being improved continuously.
                This presentation will describe our project from various perspectives, including
                    the following principal points of discussion. (1) An overview of the Suda
                    itself, including a few examples that illustrate its diverse composition and
                    unique value for several fields of humanistic scholarship, despite its flaws and
                    peculiarities. (2) The multiyear interdisciplinary collaboration among computer
                    scientists, historians, and philologists that has produced our results so far.
                    (3) The academic ideology that guides our production of a freely-available and
                    open-ended e-text, including significant ways in which our editorial practices
                    diverge from more traditional ones. (4) The most important features of the
                    online site available on a hierarchical basis to the participants and the
                    general public. (5) The specific applications and programming technologies that
                    enable those features. (6) Our most recent effort: generation of a unified,
                    complete, and self-documenting XML snapshot of our data. This latest ability
                    addresses our responsibility to ensure the long-term archival security and
                    viability of our results, and it also allows us to experiment with powerful new
                    technologies centered around XSLT programming and the Cocoon environment for the
                    transformation and publication of electronic documents. The presentation will
                    include a demonstration of these experiments and conclude with the prospects for
                    future developments.
            
        
    
