


    
        
            
                Towards an Electronic Esposizioni: Code as
                    Commentary
                
                    
                        Cristiana
                        Fordyce
                        
                            Brown University
                            cristiana_fordyce@brown.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Vika
                        Zafrin
                        
                            Brown University
                            zafrin@brown.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                In 1374, the city of Florence awarded Giovanni Boccaccio the honor and
                    responsibility of presenting to a civic audience Dante's Divine
                        Comedy, and of commenting on it. The author of the Decameron held a series of lectures on the Comedy at the Church of Santo Stefano. He doubled as commentator
                    and preacher: the lectures were intended as both literary and moral education.
                    Boccaccio was engaged to elucidate all one hundred cantos of the Divine Comedy; unfortunately, he died long before he could
                    complete this task, and the readings are abandoned at Canto 17 of the Inferno.
                The text of Boccaccio's lectures has survived to our days as the Esposizioni sopra la Comedia. Despite only covering the first
                    seventeen cantos, in print, it is over 700 pages long.In our
                        project, we follow the text as established in the most recent critical
                        edition, edited by Giorgio Padoan, Esposizioni sopra la
                            Comedia (Milan: Mondadori, 1965). The text is comprised
                    of an Accessus (introduction) followed by literal and allegorical exposition on
                    each of the first cantos of the Inferno. (The tenth
                    canto contains no allegorical exposition, as Boccaccio claims that it contains
                    no allegorical import.) The Esposizioni therefore
                    functions both as lecture series and as encyclopedia. From the beginning,
                    Boccaccio keeps a prudent distance from theological and intellectual
                    exposition.
                Most interested in revealing the effectiveness and clarity of the Dantean text,
                    Boccaccio strives to cater to the needs of his listeners. He accomplishes this
                    through maintaining the traditional rhetorical form of the expositio, while
                    focusing on the utility of the Comedy for the audience
                    he is to instruct. Boccaccio employs simple and effective means of delivery, in
                    an attempt to evoke in his audience images and exempla from collective memory
                    and individual experience. Despite his awareness of the great responsibility
                    with which he was charged, Boccaccio seems to have felt indebted neither to the
                    rhetorical tradition nor to moral instruction in his effort to produce the
                    utilitas of comprehension of the magnitude of Dante's work.
                Today, we have chosen to offer Dante's text online as commented and presented by
                    one of the most prominent medieval literary critics. We aim at employing the
                    spirit that inspired Boccaccio in his lectures. To this end, we wish to recreate
                    for the modern reader the same utility and efficiency for which Boccaccio's
                    lessons strove with regard to his own audience. The exigencies of our
                    contemporaries when reading a medieval text are not the same as those of the
                    people who gathered in Santo Stefano more than six hundred years ago. The
                    present audience needs to be introduced not only to Dante but to the language
                    and rhetorical structures that Boccaccio employed to benefit the public of his
                    time. To understand the Esposizioni, it is first
                    necessary to understand the audience to whom the lectures were addressed in the
                    first place.
                This project is in the beginning stages of development. Our ultimate aim is to
                    map the relationships between our various primary and secondary source texts –
                    the text of the Esposizioni itself, that of the Divine Comedy, and the writing of the many other authors
                    whom Boccaccio quotes. We will be using XML to encode essential information
                    about the people and places mentioned in the Esposizioni, paying particular attention to information that the
                    medieval lecture attendee would have taken for granted, which may not be quite
                    as obvious to the modern reader. In the course of his exposition, Boccaccio
                    frequently alludes to texts by classical and medieval authors (such as Virgil
                    and Livy); we plan to make available the relevant passages from those texts
                    alongside the principal text. For example, it will be useful to provide context
                    and detail about the external texts Boccaccio quotes, as well as historical and
                    biographical information regarding the authors upon whose work he bases his
                    arguments. Where other types of annotation are necessary which will bring our
                    audience closer to Boccaccio's writing, thereby making it more useful in
                    understanding the Comedy, they will also be inserted.
                In this paper, we would like to address some issues which have arisen in the
                    process of our thinking about how to approach such a project electronically. The
                        Esposizioni is a fascinating, multilayered medieval
                    text. We treat it as both a commentary and expositio on Dante, and as a
                    stand-alone, authoritative text. We view our electronic publication in the same
                    dichotomous fashion; in addition to presenting the text of the commentary, we
                    provide our own commentary in the form of the code itself. It is essentially a
                    divulgative commentary: our purpose is to bring to our readers enough
                    supplementary information to Boccaccio's text for it to be as useful to them as
                    it was to his medieval audience. Of course, we cannot hope to replicate the
                    experience of the original audience of this text, but with an awareness of the
                    inter-relations between author, speaker, audience, and reader, we hope to create
                    a multivalent resource which will challenge and inform in a similar way to that
                    envisaged by Boccaccio in his lectures.
                As our starting point, we embrace Michel Meyer's view of rhetoric as a method of
                    negotiation between two poles – the listener (reader) on one hand, and the
                    writer on the other. We follow Meyer's lead to consider our role in encoding and
                    presenting the Esposizioni as a formal negotiation
                    between intended audiences. The markup of the text, as Lou Burnard has pointed
                    out, rests on the importance of "a single encoding scheme, a unified semiotic
                    system... a single formalism [by using which] we reduce the complexity inherent
                    in representing the interconnectedness of all aspects of our hermeneutic
                    analysis, and thus facilitate a polyvalent analysis" (Burnard 1998). Although
                    Burnard was speaking about mark-up in general, his point is especially valid for
                    a complex electronic medieval text such as the Esposizioni.
                What we do by commenting through markup is not new, so why do all this with the
                    aid of a computer? The answer to this is inextricably tied to the principal
                    difference between the potential audience for our project, and Boccaccio's.
                    There are no specific records for those who attended Boccaccio’s expository
                    lectures, but we can assume that a large part of the audience was literate at
                    least in the Florentine vernacular, and possibly in Latin as well. The
                    prestigious lectures would have attracted academic and clerical professionals,
                    scholars and students, as well as interested members of the lay community. There
                    are many differences between Boccaccio’s audience and the modern-day reader of
                    the Esposizioni. First and foremost, we are no longer a
                    memory-based culture, and the modern reader tends not to possess the mnemonic
                    resources which would have enabled Boccaccio’s original audience to recognize
                    his explicit and implied intertextual allusions. The amount of information
                    available to us nowadays is so vast that we are a research-based learning
                    culture, much more heavily dependent on libraries and other information
                    depositories. In addition, the modern reader may have had relatively little
                    exposure to the key texts for the medieval scholar, such as the major classical
                    and medieval authors, and even the Bible. Finally, even if the modern reader has
                    the linguistic ability to engage with an Italian-language text, they may not
                    have the facility to read and understand the many Latin citations in this
                    work.
                All of the above problems can be resolved through a sympathetic and accurate
                    annotation of the electronic text. Electronic data storage space is our only
                    choice for the easiest and most coherent presentation of the amount of
                    information we must convey in order to bring our audience closer to Boccaccio's.
                    Furthermore, by putting the Esposizioni online, we
                    offer the option of simplifying the commentary for the electronic user, by
                    offering various different ways into the text. Boccaccio's text often seems
                    chaotic in nature to the modern reader: it is endlessly self-referential,
                    sometimes self-contradictory, and at other times simply incorrect. (We should
                    not of course forget that the text we have is a series of notes intended for
                    oral delivery and possible further explication.) By a semantic encoding of each
                    of the themes and subjects treated within this dauntingly linear exposition, the
                    user is no longer constrained to follow Boccaccio’s digressive reasoning. This
                    opportunity to encode a series of short comments on varied subjects and make
                    them semantically searchable is a great advantage of the medium and will be of
                    great value to future users..
                Electronic publication and dissemination of this medieval text does not restore
                    it to its original meaning, but it does restore it to its original purpose: to
                    take a text out of the hands of the elite and bring it closer to all members of
                    the interested public. The electronic medium is thus, paradoxically, a simpler,
                    more straightforward one than print, for our purposes. Paper-based publication
                    of such a tightly interwoven, heavily annotated text could in theory convey all
                    this information, but would do so in a much more awkward fashion. Instead, we
                    will publish it electronically, making it easier both for us to comment, and for
                    our readers to apprehend. The computer is our "wooden key,"; we "wish nothing
                    but to open what is closed," and will use the simplest tool for the task."It is a noteworthy quality to love the truth in the words, not the
                        words themselves. For what use is a golden key if it cannot unlock what we
                        desire? And what is wrong with a wooden key, if it can unlock what we
                        desire, when we wish nothing but to open what is closed?". Peter Abelard,
                        Prologue to Sic et non, in the online Medieval Sourcebook: We will thus de-mystify the Esposizioni
                    for our contemporaries, as Boccaccio in his time de-mystified the Divine Comedy.
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Peter
                                    Abelard
                                
                            
                            Prologue to Sic et non
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Blanche
                                    B.
                                    Boyer
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Richard
                                    McKeon
                                
                            
                            Sic et Non: a critical edition
                            
                                Chicago
                                University of Chicago Press
                                1976-1977
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Lou
                                    Burnard
                                
                            
                            On the hermeneutic implications of text
                                encoding
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Domenico
                                    Fiormonte
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Jonathan
                                    Usher
                                
                            
                            New Media and the Humanities: Research and
                                Applications. Proceedings of the first seminar “Computers,
                                literature and philology.” Edinburgh, 7-9 September 1998
                            
                                Oxford
                                Humanities Computing Unit, University of
                                    Oxford
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Mary
                                    J.
                                    Carruthers
                                
                            
                            The book of memory: a study of memory in medieval
                                culture
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1990
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Meyer
                                
                            
                            Rhetoric, language, and reason
                            
                                University Park
                                Pennsylvania State University Press
                                1994
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
