


    
        
            
                The Development of the Poetry Portal at the Beck
                    Center, Woodruff Library, Emory University
                
                    
                        Alice
                        Hickcox
                        
                            Emory University
                            ahickco@emory.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Julia
                        Leon
                        
                            Emory University
                            jleon@emory.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Emory University Library's electronic text center, known as the Beck Center for
                    Electronic Collections and Services, holds a number of poetry collections that
                    are served out on the web as separate databases. In order to span these
                    collections of more than 200,000 poems we set out to develop a portal that would
                    allow searching across several different databases. The portal provides students
                    and faculty a tool for retrieving and reading individual poems for personal and
                    classroom teaching and research. The portal was implemented using XML
                    technology.
                This is a story of the development of the site, explaining why the project was
                    conceived, and how the library, Information Technology Division and faculty
                    collaborated to design and implement the portal. The web-interface design and
                    technical architecture will also be described.
                Since 1995 the Beck Center has built a collection of texts that are tagged in
                    SGML; many of these texts are poetry databases. Both commercially and locally
                    produced texts comprise the electronic poetry holdings of the Beck Center. The
                    texts were served separately out in a number of discrete poetry databases, each
                    with its own search interface.
                Emory's Irish Poets collection is one example of a locally produced digital
                    collection. A portion of Emory's literary archives of Ireland's leading poets
                    was digitized. The archives were developed over the course of the last twenty
                    years, and includes worksheets of the poets affiliated with the Belfast
                    Group-including Seamus Heaney, Michael Longley, and Paul Muldoon.
                In addition to the substantial body of electronic texts that existed, campus-wide
                    interest in poetry was building, demonstrated by the establishment of a Poetry
                    Council which sponsors periodic poetry readings.
                These forces converged to raise questions about how to make the use of on-line
                    poetry resources easier to access and more logical in organization and use. A
                    group of people from the library and the Information Technology support group
                    for faculty came together to plan for a poetry portal. The Beck Center provided
                    data management. ITD provided analysis and programming support. An informal
                    focus group of Emory faculty who teach poetry provided subject matter
                    expertise.
                The Beck Center put forth the original vision of the project: to present poetry
                    across multiple collections through a common web portal. A prototype of the
                    portal was built as a proof of concept of the use of metadata and XML
                    technology. It also served as the launching point for further design.
                The unifying element of the disparate collections is the metadata, which contains
                    information that was deemed useful for cataloging, indexing, and referencing
                    items.
                The portal was built entirely with open-source software, with the one exception
                    of the search engine. The process of building the portal may be divided in to
                    two sub-applications: data preparation and the web interface.
                Data preparation involved converting the source collections from SGML to XML.
                    From the XML metadata was created using XSLT and SAX software. The metadata was
                    stored in the Dublin Core format.
                The web interface for the poetry portal employs a suite of XML technologies.
                    Specifically, Tomcat and Cocoon, from the Apache Software Foundation, serve up
                    XML source files on the web. XSLT (XML Style Sheet Language Transformation) is
                    used to transform XML to HTML.
                The prototype application was demonstrated to English faculty involved in
                    teaching poetry. A blue-sky discussion of how a portal could be useful and
                    interesting in teaching and research formed the basis of the application
                    requirements.
                The interface provides browse and search capabilities. The collection may be
                    browsed by author, title, first line, collection, or date. The user may search
                    for poems, either by word used anywhere in the poem, by author, date or title.
                    Either browsing or searching will take the user to a poem window or a series of
                    poem windows.
                From a poem window the user may also search for other poems by the same author,
                    other poems of the same date, other poems with the same title or other poems in
                    the same volume or collection. The user may also execute a simple search in the
                        Oxford English Dictionary from the poem window, and
                    bring up results in another window.
                Additional features that we hope to implement include user-defined "poetry
                    notebooks," which allow users to save links to particular poems or searches, a
                    search history for registered users, and the ability to save searches.
                Some associated features that were not part of the XML search-retrieval
                    programming also emerged as special projects. One such project would be to
                    collect manuscript and published versions of certain poems of poets that were in
                    their collections in various forms, and to present them for study. Another
                    specialized application is to have poems accompanied by audio files so that
                    students can hear the poems read aloud. For some of the poems in their Special
                    Collections, tapes were available of poets reading their own work. Other
                    possibilities exist for audio performance as well.
            
        
    
