


    
        
            
                Computational Generation of Limericks
                
                    
                        Greg
                        Lessard
                        
                            Queen's University
                            lessardg@qsilver.queensu.ca
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    FOREWORD
                    
                        A program called VINCI from Queen's
                         Employs computational means
                        To make metre and rhyme
                        In right to left time
                        So limericks appear on your screens.
                    
                    
                        The people attending this session
                        We hope will have gained the impression
                         That these powerful tools,
                        With appropriate rules,
                        Can give rise to poetic expression!
                    
                
                
                    BACKGROUND
                    There is evidence that the generation of at least some classes of humour is a
                        rule-governed activity, formalisable in terms of algorithms, and
                        implementable computationally in order to generate actual humorous
                        utterances. In earlier work, using the VINCI natural language generation
                        environment, we have shown this to be the case for several subclasses of
                        verbal humour, including Tom Swifties and several classes of riddles. (See
                        Lessard &amp; Levison, 1992, 1993, 1995, 1997). Others have done similar
                        work (see for example Binsted &amp; Ritchie, 1997). This does not mean
                        that we suppose the specific algorithms used in generation to exist as
                        internal mental representations in speakers, but only that the productions
                        observed in humans admit of formalisation.
                    It must be admitted, however, that puns and riddles form instances of what is
                        often called verbal humour. This is typically non-narrative, based on
                        relatively simple paradigmatic lexical relations, and usually evaluated in
                        terms of cleverness rather than funniness. (See Lessard, Levison &amp;
                        Venour, 2002, for a discussion of the distinction.) Instances of verbal
                        humour are in many respects inherently simpler than more narrative
                        structures like jokes. Limericks, on the other hand, presuppose at least a
                        primitive narrative structure. As such, they provide a useful proving ground
                        for more advanced work on both language generation (since it is necessary to
                        take account of textual coherence) and humour generation (since narrative
                        structure is involved).
                
                
                    LIMERICKS
                    Limericks may be characterised generally as five-line verses with the aabba
                        rhyme scheme, one of a range of metrical foot structures, and some attempt
                        at humour or at least cleverness. (For discussion, see Bibby, 1978). A
                        typical example will illustrate the model:
                    
                        There was an old man from Peru
                        Who dreamt he was eating his shoe
                        He awoke with a fright
                        In the midst of the night
                        And found it was perfectly true.
                    
                    Taken as a subset of more general poetic language, limericks confront us with
                        a number of practical problems, but also with a number of theoretical
                        challenges when they are compared with prose-based natural language
                        generation. For example, traditional approaches to text planning and
                        generation tend to be driven by conceptual and syntactic rather than
                        metrical structure. This is unsurprising when one considers that the object
                        of most systems of the sort is to represent some encyclopedic or
                        data-base-like description of some state of affairs in a discursive format.
                        In such a context, the primary factors to be considered include the model of
                        the user (see for example Paris, 1993), the overall structure of the text
                        plan (see for example McKeown, 1985), paragraph-level phenomena (see for
                        example Mann, 2002), and problems of reference (see for example Dale,
                        1992).
                    As a consequence, planning tends to be top-down (from universe of discourse,
                        to dialogue model, to context, to overall text, to paragraph, to sentence)
                        and many of the phenomena to be dealt with (anaphora, for example) can be
                        examined in a left-to-right sequence. This has meant that conceptual tools
                        such as phrase structure grammars or their variants have provided sufficient
                        power to deal with the problems raised. Even phenomena such as freer word
                        order may be captured in such systems by means such as the splitting apart
                        of linear precedence and immediate dominance as in formalisms like
                        Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar (Gazdar et alii, 1985).
                    The production of poetic text, on the other hand, requires that content be
                        filtered by metrical and phonological factors such as the number of
                        syllables, stress, and rhyme. A particularly interesting consequence of this
                        fact is that generation must take account of the ends of lines in the
                        production of the beginning and middle. For example, in the case of the
                        limerick quoted above, we may represent the syllable structure as follows,
                        where s represents an unstressed and S a stressed syllable:
                    It can be seen that the first, second and fifth line contain an iamb followed
                        by two anapests, while the third and fourth lines contain two anapests. In
                        addition, rhyming lines (Peru-shoe-true) must end on the same stressed
                        syllable nucleus and coda (to use the terminology of metrical phonology (see
                        for example Hogg, 1987). Note that these are not necessarily lexical items:
                        in the first, second and fifth lines, the sequences “his shoe” and “-ly
                        true” rhyme with “Peru”.
                
                
                    GENERATION
                    A full analysis of the semantic, syntactic, lexical and phonological
                        relations found in the limerick would take more space than is available
                        here. However, from the generative perspective, it is possible to imagine
                        three mechanisms to satisfy this constellation of constraints:
                            1. exhaustive generation: in essence, if we define a set of
                                templates, we can generate large numbers of instances of potential
                                limericks and ask a human to select those few judged to be of good
                                quality. (This is the monkeys typing Shakespeare model, or Borges’
                                library.)
                            2. initial generation followed by tweaking: we may also begin by
                                producing a sequence of lines and then selectively edit these to
                                approach the target of an acceptable limerick, by means of the
                                addition, removal or shifting of items. This may be how human poets
                                work: it is how we produced the limericks at the head of this
                                abstract. (Valéry is said to have claimed that the first line of a
                                poem was a gift of the gods and that the remainder was the product
                                of the poet's craft and efforts.) Since the edit operations
                                described above are well-known in the computational context, it is
                                not impossible to imagine their implementation.
                            3. right-to-left generation: given the direction of the
                                constraints in limericks, a possible computational model involves
                                the selection of the right-most elements of a sequence of lines as a
                                starting point and then within each line, the
                                constraint-satisfaction generation of the intervening elements
                                required to flesh out the entire limerick.
                        
                    In fact, these right-to-left formal constraints must interact with top-down
                        constraints which govern the semantic coherence of the text. In other words,
                        in order for the limerick to be coherent, the narrative events which it
                        includes must be consistent with the subject. These thematic constraints may
                        be fairly loose, as in the Old Man from Peru poem, where there is no
                        particular logic which attaches old men from that part of South America and
                        the ingestion of footwear (although more generally, the poem respects the
                        constraint that old men are humans and that humans eat food which is a
                        subset of tangible objects, and that footwear is also a subset of tangible
                        objects). On the other hand, they may be quite tight, as in the VINCI
                        limericks, which capture a set of characteristics of the software (its
                        origin, the architecture of the program). Compare as well Bibby’s attempts
                        to produce limericks appropriate to each of the Cambridge colleges.
                    The limerick thus represents the semantic expansion from one or more initial
                        lexical choices, by means of the selection of traits or actions which are at
                        least consistent with these. This presupposes a rich representation of the
                        characteristics of each lexical item, including both high-level semantic
                        traits such as that between humans, eating and objects, but also more
                        encyclopedic ’information, such as the fact that VINCI is a program produced
                        at Queen's. (See Peeters, 2000 for a discussion of some of the problems
                        found at this ‘lexicon-encyclopedia interface’). Note also that a
                        sufficiently rich set of traits will provide the seed for variant limericks
                        based on the same starting point. Consider for example the following example
                        by Edward Lear:
                    
                        There was an Old Man of Peru,
                        Who watched his wife making a stew;
                        But once by mistake,
                        In a stove she did bake,
                        That unfortunate Man of Peru.
                    
                    At the formal level, problems arise both between lines (rhyme) and within
                        lines (metrical structure). Consider the latter in the context of the
                        initial old man from Peru poem. Let us assume that we have determined to use
                        a metrical structure based on an iamb and two anapests and that we have
                        selected the the place-name Peru. At this point, we have used up two of the
                        eight available syllables. We also know that the next earliest syllable must
                        be unaccented. The solution found here is “from”. At this point, we know
                        that we have a prepositional phrase “from Peru” which requires (among other
                        choices) a noun phrase with the appropriate accent structure. This
                        constraint is satisfied here by “an old man”). However, in order to verify
                        that this noun phrase is appropriate, we must have knowledge of its metrical
                        structure. For example, if the target were an iamb, we would need to seek,
                        among other possibilities, a DET N structure. This application of
                        constraints cascades right to left until the overall metrical target is met,
                        within the semantic constraints already specified
                
                
                    IMPLEMENTATION
                    In the conference presentation, we will illustrate the implementation of the
                        approach described above using the VINCI natural language generation
                        environment (see  for
                        details). Briefly, VINCI allows for the initial specification (PRESELECTION)
                        of a constellation of lexical items which may be constrained by semantics,
                        morphological and syntactic characteristics, and phonology. Preselected
                        items, as well as all their characteristics, are available to subsequent
                        steps of the generation process. Among other things, this allows for
                        multiple layers of preselection, in which a first item determines a set of
                        rhyme constraints, as well as a set of semantically appropriate
                        elements.
                    Within each line of the limerick, and between lines, the VINCI mechanism of
                        GUARDED SYNTAX allows the control of subsequent steps of the overall
                        generation to be conditioned by the framework existing at that point. (A
                        simple example of guarded syntax: if a noun phrase node carries the
                        attributes ‘first person’ or ‘second person’, then its children may only be
                        instantiated by a pronoun, whereas if the parent node carries the attribute
                        ‘third person’, then the children may be pronouns, full noun phrases, or
                        proper names.) Applied to the production of a limerick, and assuming
                        right-to-left generation, if the parent node of a tree contains a
                        prepositional phrase which sums to an anapest, then the next left-most chunk
                        of syntax must inherit this information and construct an appropriate item
                        from a library of possible patterns.
                    One consequence of this model is that syntax is reduced from a single
                        overarching tree to the sum of a number of possible micro-trees. Such an
                        approach is comparable to the model of Tree Adjoining Grammars, in which
                        insertion and development occurs at the level of lexical-based subtrees (see
                        Joshi &amp; Schabes, 1997). It is also somewhat similar to the Labelled
                        Deductive System approach used in parsing by Kempson et alii, 2001. Another
                        consequence is that by precluding tweaking and editing, the system itself is
                        forced to deal with the interplay of linguistic levels and constraints,
                        without human assistance, thus providing an acid test for both the model and
                        the implementation. Of course, this leaves aside the question of evaluation,
                        itself a thorny issue, since the criteria used are many, varied and probably
                        fuzzy as well. In related work, we are examining the ability of humans to
                        learn how to produce limericks, as well as their ability to evaluate
                        them.
                
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Harold
                                    Cyril
                                    Bibby
                                
                            
                            The Art of the Limerick
                            
                                Hamden, Conn.
                                Archon Books
                                1978
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Kim
                                    Binsted
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Graeme
                                    Ritchie
                                
                            
                            Computational rules for punning riddles
                        
                        
                            Humor
                            
                                10
                                1
                                25-76
                                1997
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Robert
                                    Dale
                                
                            
                            Generating referring expressions: constructing
                                descriptions in a domain of objects and processes
                            
                                Cambridge, Mass.
                                MIT Press
                                1992
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ruth
                                    Kempson
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Wilfried
                                    Meyer-Viol
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Dov
                                    Gabbay
                                
                            
                            Dynamic Syntax: the Flow of Language
                                Understanding
                            
                                London
                                Blackwell
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    Gazdar
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    E.
                                    Klein
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    Pullum
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    I.
                                    Sag
                                
                            
                            Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar
                            
                                Cambridge, MA
                                Harvard University Press
                                1985
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Richard
                                    Hogg
                                
                            
                            Metrical phonology: a coursebook
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1987
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    K.
                                    Joshi
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Y.
                                    Schabes
                                
                            
                            Tree-Adjoining Grammars
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    G.
                                    Rozenberg
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    A.
                                    Salomaa
                                
                            
                            Handbook of Formal Languages
                            
                                Vol. 3
                                Berlin
                                Springer
                                1997
                                69-124
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Greg
                                    Lessard
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Levison
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Chris
                                    Venour
                                
                            
                            Cleverness versus funniness
                        
                        
                            April Fool’s Day Workshop on Computational Humour,
                                Trento
                            
                                
                                
                                2002
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Greg
                                    Lessard
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Levison
                                
                            
                            Rule-governed wordplay and creativity
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Mind II: Computational Models of Creative
                                Cognition
                            
                                
                                Dublic City University
                                1997
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Greg
                                    Lessard
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Levison
                                
                            
                            Linguistic and Cognitive Underpinnings of Verbal
                                Humour
                        
                        
                            International Cognitive Linguistics Association
                                Conference, Albuquerque
                            
                                
                                
                                1995
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Greg
                                    Lessard
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Levison
                                
                            
                            Computational Modelling of Riddling Strategies
                        
                        
                            ACH/ALLC Joint Annual Conference, Georgetown
                                University, Washington, DC
                            
                                
                                
                                1993
                            
                        
                        (Extended abstract in conference proceedings, pp. 120–122.)
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Greg
                                    Lessard
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Michael
                                    Levison
                                
                            
                            Computational Modelling of Linguistic Humour: Tom
                                Swifties
                        
                        
                            ALLC/ACH Joint Annual Conference, Christ Church,
                                Oxford
                            
                                
                                
                                1992
                            
                        
                        (Extended abstract in conference proceedings, pp. 175–178.)
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    W>
                                    Mann
                                
                            
                            RST Web Site
                            
                                
                                
                                2002
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Kathleen
                                    McKeown
                                
                            
                            Text generation : using discourse strategies and focus
                                constraints to generate natural language text
                            
                                Cambridge
                                Cambridge University Press
                                1985
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Cécile
                                    Paris
                                
                            
                            User modelling in text generation
                            
                                London
                                Francis Pinter Publishers
                                1993
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Bert
                                    Peeters
                                
                            
                            The Lexicon-encyclopedia interface
                            
                                New York
                                Elsevier
                                2000
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
