


    
        
            
                The Charles W. Cushman Collection: Enhancing Visual
                    Resource Discovery Through Descriptive Metadata Based on Subjective Image
                    Analysis
                
                    
                        Linda
                        Cantara
                        
                            Indiana University Libraries
                            lcantara@indiana.edu
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Charles W. Cushman CollectionThis project is funded by an IMLS
                        National Leadership Grant. comprises nearly 18,000 Kodachrome slides,
                    captured from 1938 to 1969 by Charles Weever Cushman, an accomplished amateur
                    photographer, world traveler, and pioneer in the use of color photography.
                    Cushman bequeathed the collection to his alma mater, Indiana University, on his
                    death in 1972, yet its existence was virtually unknown until late 1999 when a
                    university archivist rediscovered the suitcases in which the slides were stored,
                    along with Cushman’s notebooks containing identifying information and dates for
                    each slide. The images visually document in color the vernacular history of
                    people, places, and events that have previously been seen only or primarily in
                    black and white. To provide online access to the collection, a project team at
                    Indiana—including staff of the Digital Library Program, the University Archives,
                    and the University Libraries— has digitized the slides and has designed a
                    relational database to document administrative, technical, and descriptive
                    metadata about the images. Transcriptions of Cushman’s notebook annotations and
                    corresponding documentation on slide mounts will be keyword searchable. In
                    addition, we are creating descriptive metadata for each image by assigning terms
                    for subject content, genre, physical characteristics, and geographic location.
                    The terms are selected from standard controlled vocabularies, primarily the
                    Library of Congress Thesauri for Graphic Materials (TGM I and TGM II), but also
                    Library of Congress Authorities Files (LCAF) and the Getty Thesaurus of
                    Geographic Names (TGN). When all the slides have been cataloged, the database
                    will be mapped to an XML format—most likely Encoded Archival Description (EAD)
                    but possibly Metadata Object Description Schema (MODS)—and will be searchable
                    over the Web.
                The use of controlled vocabularies in the descriptive metadata of a large image
                    collection has the potential to optimize visual resource discovery, but many
                    issues must be addressed and resolved to ensure the expense of assigning the
                    terms truly results in improved image retrieval:
                        The Library of Congress Thesaurus for Graphic Materials I: Subject
                            Terms (TGM I) and Thesaurus for Graphic Materials II: Genre and Physical
                            Characteristic Terms (TGM II) include topic headings developed by the
                            Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division over the past fifty
                            years to catalog graphic materials. In adherence with ANSI/NISO
                                Z39.19-1994,ANSI/NISO Z39.19-1984 is the American
                                National Standards Institute/National Information Standards
                                Organization Guidelines for the Construction, Format and Management
                                of Monolingual Thesauri. NISO recently announced plans to revise
                                these guidelines: see .
                            terms are expressed in natural language word order following American
                            English spelling conventions. Although new terms are added regularly
                            based on proposals submitted by catalogers (Alexander), these thesauri
                            frequently lack the specificity desirable for describing individual
                            images. In addition, regardless of the domain knowledge and cataloging
                            expertise of personnel performing image analysis to assign subject
                            headings, inconsistencies are inevitable. Professional catalogers of
                            traditional media readily acknowledge that subject analysis of printed
                            materials may vary from cataloger to cataloger as well as from day to
                            day. In this paper, I will discuss how we have attempted to approximate
                            consistency of image analysis by multiple catalogers, the quality
                            control procedures we have implemented to further ensure uniformity of
                            subject term assignment, and the “work- arounds” we have devised to deal
                            with encountered inadequacies in the selected controlled
                            vocabularies.
                        The Digital Library Federation, the Getty Grant Program, and the
                            Andrew W. Mellon Foundation in cooperation with Rice University are
                            currently sponsoring a Visual Resources Association (VRA) review and
                            evaluation of existing data content standards and current practice in
                            order to compile a guide to good practice for describing cultural
                            objects and images. The forthcoming Cataloguing Cultural Objects: A
                            Guide to Describing Cultural Objects and their Images—the CCO Guide—will
                            provide recommendations and examples for using data value standards
                            tools and building authority records.See  and “Project
                                Proposal for Guide to Good Practice: Cataloging Standards for
                                Describing Cultural Objects and Images,” Digital Library Federation,
                                January 12, 2001, at .
                            Used in concert with XML data structure and communication standards, the
                            CCO Guide will facilitate consistent creation of descriptive metadata
                            for visual resources, enabling interactive and complex search options.
                            Paradoxically, Open Archive Initiative Metadata Harvester (OAI-PMH)
                            service providers require data providers map rich metadata to
                            unqualified Dublin Core, while content aggregators like the Research
                            Libraries Group (RLG) Cultural Materials service must currently treat
                            all controlled vocabulary terms as keywords.See the Research
                                Libraries Group (RLG) Cultural Materials site at . In this regard, the RLG states, “Ultimately, we hope to add
                                powerful ‘assisted searching’ tools, to help users navigate across
                                different vocabularies and subject schemes, but in the meantime we
                                are simply using whatever subject terms are provided in the source
                                data.” (See ). Although neither OAI service providers nor RLG preclude
                            the use of multiple or complex metadata formats, content creators
                            nevertheless face a quandary: why commit extensive and expensive
                            personnel hours to create increasingly rich metadata when interoperable
                            and federated access is possible when implementing simpler, less costly,
                            metadata standards?I am, of course, playing the devil’s
                                advocate here.
                        The foremost concern when designing and implementing an image
                            retrieval system should be the searching needs of the user community
                            (Sundt). Art historians, for example, may be trained in the use of one
                            or more controlled vocabularies specific to art images,For
                                example, Getty Art &amp; Architecture Thesaurus (AAT) at ,
                                ICONCLASS at http://www.iconclass.nl/, and Categories for the
                                Description of Works of Art at . but users of vernacular photography collections may have
                            limited experience with any controlled vocabulary. Since lack of
                            familiarity with the underlying vocabulary tools may actually diminish
                            rather than enhance user interaction, the search interface should
                            ideally facilitate direct mining of the encoded metadata, directing the
                            user to broader, narrower, related and cross-referenced subject terms.
                            This paper will conclude with a review of our usability test findings in
                            respect to a prototype interface that integrates TGM I and II terms into
                            the search facilities for the Cushman Collection.
                    
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Arden
                                    Alexander
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    Tracy
                                    Meehleib
                                
                            
                            The Thesaurus for Graphic Materials: Its History, Use,
                                and Future
                        
                        
                            Cataloging &amp; Classification Quarterly
                            
                                31
                                3/4
                                189-211
                                2001
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Encoded Archival Description
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names (TGN)
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Guidelines for Implementing DC in XML
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Library of Congress Authorities
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Library of Congress Thesauri of Graphic Materials: TGM
                                I (Subjects) and TGM II (Genre and Physical Characteristics
                                Terms)
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;
                                &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Metadata Object Description Schema (MODS)
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Open Archives Initiative FAQ
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        &lt;&gt;.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christine
                                    L.
                                    Sundt
                                
                            
                            The Image User and the Search for Images
                        
                        
                            
                                
                                    Murtha
                                    Baca
                                
                            
                            Introduction to Art Image Access: Issues, Tools,
                                Standards, Strategies
                            
                                Los Angeles
                                Getty Research Institute
                                2002
                                67-85
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
