


    
        
            
                The Austrian Academy Corpus, an Extensive Corpus of
                    German Literature and Language - The AAC Literary Journals Subcorpora
                
                    
                        Hanno
                        Biber
                        
                            Austrian Academy Corpus
                            hanno.biber@oeaw.ac.at
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Evelyn
                        Breiteneder
                        
                            Austrian Academy Corpus
                            evelyn.breiteneder@oeaw.ac.at
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Karlheinz
                        Moerth
                        
                            Austrian Academy Corpus
                            karlheinz.moerth@oeaw.ac.at
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                In this paper we would like to present one special subsection of the Austrian
                    Academy Corpus. The AAC is a newly founded institution organized and planned at
                    the Austrian Academy of Sciences in Vienna, in which large scholarly digital
                    resources are being established. We will describe the specific selection and
                    processing of historical literary journals that are to be integrated into the
                    AAC. The AAC Literary Journals Subcorpora will include a considerable number of
                    influential journals and magazines which will be made available electronically
                    and will be analyzed and digitally interrelated by means of XML annotation. The
                    general concept and the idea of the AAC, its approach and its potential for the
                    studies of texts of various kinds will also be addressed in this paper.
                The AAC is a multifunctional digital text corpus with new research possibilities
                    in the fields of linguistics as well as for textual research, in the fields of
                    literary studies, for discourse studies and the like. The AAC, comprising an
                    abundance of different sources, focuses predominantly on German language texts
                    from the last 150 years, but also includes translations from other languages and
                    corresponding source texts. This large electronic text collection contains a
                    great variety of significant texts, historical texts, literary texts, and texts
                    stemming from various cultural and social domains. Apart from literary texts and
                    literary journals, there will be a wide collection of various text types and
                    other text type carriers incorporated, such as newspapers and newspaper
                    articles, advertisement, posters, speeches and other examples from the media and
                    the entertainment domain, the arts, but also from jurisprudence, religion,
                    politics, philosophy and other domains. The corpus approach being developed at
                    the AAC is determined by our conviction that for specific language related
                    research interests only consistent corpora that provide sufficient context can
                    be useful, corpora that supply users with complete and thoroughly described
                    texts. This is particularly the case in the field of scholarly research which
                    focuses towards literary text studies and historical discourse analysis, a field
                    where literary texts from certain historical periods and their specific features
                    will be the main objects of investigation. Corpus-based linguistic and literary
                    text research will be made possible by means of a variety of descriptive
                    elements integrated into the text collections of the AAC. Reliable corpus tools
                    and sound methods of corpus description and analysis have become indispensable
                    means of research. At the AAC, all texts are digitized and annotated by means of
                    XML, in order to facilitate thorough investigations and research into the
                    textual qualities of the corpus holdings. How modern technology and standards
                    can be integrated in traditionally oriented fields of research such as literary
                    studies will be exemplified through the AAC's digitization projects.
                At the core of the AAC and as the starting point for the selection of the texts
                    to be integrated there is the satirical magazine “Die Fackel” which was
                    published by Karl Kraus in Vienna from 1899 to 1936. In his abundant satirical
                    and polemical texts published in ”Die Fackel” consisting of 22.586 pages, Karl
                    Kraus developed satirical textual strategies in which the use of quotation,
                    citation, and commentary of others is of major importance. This unique source of
                    German literature offers a starting point not only for the future incorporation
                    of other texts in our corpus but also for further far-reaching and challenging
                    research into a number of linguistic, discursive and intertextual phenomena to
                    be observed. The magazine published by Karl Kraus offers us a unique opportunity
                    to attract the attention of anyone interested in the German language. And the
                    AAC intends to digitally present a wide selection of different sources of
                    scholarly, journalistic and political texts which were of considerable influence
                    between 1848 and 1989.
                In the first phase of the corpus build-up we have started with the digitisation
                    and structured integration of texts, among which are several highly influential
                    and notable literary journals and magazines. Literary journals have been
                    integrated into the AAC for several reasons. One reason is their importance form
                    the point of view of literary history. Literary journals have been neglected in
                    the studies of literary history although they form an integral part of the
                    literary life. Very often they are the place where the first publications of
                    major literary works appear. They are in a mediator position within the literary
                    market and have been so especially in the 19th and 20th centuries not only in
                    the German speaking countries. Secondly, literary journals have been chosen as a
                    considerable subcorpus of the AAC because in most cases literary journals offer
                    a wide variety of interesting text types. Depending on their general and overall
                    political and ideological orientations they offer multiple sources and sources
                    of various kinds which are of particular interest for corpus research both from
                    theoretical and methodological perspectives. The differences and relations
                    between the various literary text types pose challenging questions concerning
                    the description and the development of digital scholarly material.
                Among the source materials for the AAC literary journals subcorpora is the well
                    known literary and political journal “Die Weltbuehne” (The World Stage),
                    previously published under the title “Die Schaubuehne” (The Theatrical Stage)
                    since 1905, and two journals that were of major importance for the expressionist
                    movement, “Die Aktion” and “Der Sturm”, all of them published in Berlin in the
                    first decades of the last century. The journal “Der Brenner” was published in
                    Innsbruck in Austria between 1910 and 1954 and is another example from the AAC
                    literary journal subcorpora and was like the ones mentioned above also
                    influenced by “Die Fackel”. In our paper we will briefly describe the
                    interrelations between these examples from the perspective of literary history,
                    and thereby concentrate on the corpus methodology of applying digital techniques
                    for the description of the processes and qualities observed. We will explain the
                    complex digitization processes and the necessary annotation schemes utilized by
                    the AAC working group in order to access the data contained and to be explored
                    in these valuable resources. In addition to that the new editing strategies
                    being developed by the AAC as well as the scholarly commentaries will be
                    presented. The literary journal subcorpora can be regarded as an experimental
                    and exemplary cohesive subsection of the Austrian Academy Corpus.
            
        
    
