


    
        
            
                Data or Document? Migration of Descriptive Metadata for
                    Medieval and Renaissance Manuscripts Between Data-Centric and Document-Centric
                    Models: A Case Study
                
                    
                        Elizabeth
                        J.
                        Shaw
                        
                            Aziza Technology Associates
                            ejshaw@azizatech.com
                        
                    
                
            
            
                2003
                
                    University of Georgia
                
                Athens, Georgia
            
            
                ACH/ALLC 2003
                
                    editor
                    
                        Eric
                        Rochester
                    
                    
                        William
                        A.
                        Kretzschmar, Jr.
                    
                        
                        
                    
                
                
                    encoder
                    
                        Sara
                        A.
                        Schmidt
                    
                
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    
                         
                         
                         
                    
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    This paper will discuss a case study of the dual direction migration of
                        metadata describing medieval and renaissance manuscript collections between
                        the Digital Scriptorium database schema and an XML DTD developed to encode
                        extant manuscript descriptions. This discussion highlights the challenges
                        and tensions that exist in trying to merge data that is captured in
                        different data models, roughly categorized as data-centric and
                        document-centric. The observations garnered from this study may have broader
                        implications for other efforts to meld distinct descriptive models for
                        unitary searching and resource discovery.
                
                
                    CONTEXT
                    The author was hired by Digital Scriptorium to:
                            1)provide XML —> HTML XSLT transformations of an electronic
                                version of the Huntington Library “Guide to Medieval and Renaissance
                                Manuscripts” which has been encoded in the TEI Medieval Manuscripts
                                Description Work Group (TEI MMSS) draft DTD ,
                            2) migrate data from the existing Digital Scriptorium database to
                                the the draft DTD and
                            3) migrate the TEI-MMSS encoded “Guide” to the Digital
                                Scriptorium’s existing database schema.
                        lIn the context of this work, many interesting challenges have come
                        to light.
                    The Digital Scriptorium database schema and the TEI MMSS draft DTD are
                        closely allied since some of the same people worked on both data models.
                        However, significant differences exist in nomenclature and structuring of
                        the data, both because the TEI MMSS DTD is an extension of TEI and because
                        the purpose of the TEI MMSS DTD is to allow for the capture of extant
                        descriptive information. The database schema, created prior to the DTD is a
                        more constrained data model and uses slightly different elements and
                        nomenclature for its basis.
                
                
                    DESCRIPTIVE TRADITIONS
                    Although the library community has largely settled on a particular
                        record-based model for descriptive information (the MARC record and AACR2)
                        about printed works, serials and selected media, many communities of
                        practice that have need of description to facilitate resource discovery and
                        scholarship have no such common standard. In many cases, a narrative form of
                        description has evolved in an attempt to capture the particular descriptive
                        needs of the curators and users of the materials. Descriptive practice in
                        disciplines such as manuscript collection or archives has varied greatly
                        across nations, institutions and within individual institutions over time.
                        This evolution has largely been dependent on the interests, energies and
                        capabilities of individual curators.
                    Furthermore, descriptive practice varies greatly between communities of
                        practice because of the particular characteristics of the disciplines that
                        they support. Both the elements of description fundamental to supporting
                        work and the nature of their expression may be unique. That these
                        descriptive needs vary greatly has become more obvious as efforts to develop
                        single metadata standards or standards that easily map across disciplines
                        have had limited success.
                    Nonetheless, these communities often face similar problems as they attempt to
                        migrate their formerly print based description to an electronic form that
                        can be shared across institutions. Each community must revalidate what
                        aspect of description is important to the work of the community, 2) define a
                        common way of expressing information about those important things and 3)
                        develop a model that accurately captures that information. The work must be
                        done in an environment with no uniform extant practice and differing
                        philosophies about the nature, scope and role of description in the
                        discipline. This paper will focus on two approaches to capturing significant
                        descriptive data within the same discipline and examine the challenges in
                        merging the two.
                
                
                    DATA-CENTRIC VS. DOCUMENT CENTRIC DATA MODELS
                    The numerous schemes for descriptive metadata that have emerged since the
                        advent of the web vary greatly in their scope, complexity and underlying
                        assumptions about the nature of descriptive practice. Ronald Bourret’s
                        article XML and Databases and his associated materials provide an
                        interesting framework from which to view these different approaches to
                        capturing descriptive metadata. The emerging practices might be categorized
                        into two distinct models:
                            Data-Centric models: These record-like
                                models capture discrete data elements in a structure that is well
                                represented in a flat or relational model (ie. Dublin Core, MARC).
                                Often these flat or relational representations atomize data at the
                                most discrete levels at which one might manipulate it. Some require
                                or enforce the normalization of the data, institute data typing and
                                constrain the syntactical expression in which it is represented. The
                                Digital Scriptorium database schema follows this record-like model,
                                though without some of the rigor of syntax that is required in a
                                MARC record.
                            Document-Centric models: These models
                                capture more narrative or discursive, often complex, hierarchical
                                descriptions. Often, they allow considerable flexibility in what
                                data elements are required, the form in which data is expressed, and
                                rarely (especially prior to the advent of XML Schema) utilize data
                                typing to constrain the expression of information.
                        
                    These document-centric models may further be categorized as those that
                        provide a representation of an idealized model of descriptive practice and
                        those that represent extant descriptive practice. Those that attempt to
                        capture an electronic edition of an extant description are often the least
                        rigorous in their requirements for data elements and normalization because
                        of the need to accommodate heterogenous practice. The tension between
                        representing an idealized model of a particular document structure—either to
                        facilitate machine processing of the data or to enforce practice in a
                        community—and providing a model that captures existing representations has
                        been discussed extensively by authors such as Piez and in efforts to develop
                        data models such as the TEI dictionaries DTD
                
                
                    CAPTURING EXTANT DESCRIPTION
                    Although document-like descriptions from various institutions and time frames
                        seem similar in format they often contain distinctly different elements of
                        description in distinct orders and with variant nomenclature. This has
                        presented challenges to the developers of DTDs and schemas that attempt to
                        capture descriptive metadata in these communities of practice. DTDs such as
                            Encoded Archival Description (EAD) and the
                        TEI MMSS draft DTD are explicitly designed to accommodate a variety of
                        extant descriptive practice rather than constrain practice to the schema
                        developers’ prescribed notions of practice.
                    The extant documents that are encoded using these models often differ greatly
                        from their record-like cousins. Narrative and complex, they utilize indirect
                        reference, inference from context (the description of a manuscript written
                        in French may never explicitly state the language in which it is written,
                        assuming that the reader can discern from the quoted text imbedded in the
                        description), inference from relationships to siblings or parent elements,
                        and assumptions about relationships of the parts of the description that are
                        not explicit. Although a human reader can infer these relationships, the
                        lack of explicitness makes it more difficult to capture characteristics of
                        the described object in machine processable ways. To capture this
                        information explicitly requires modifying the extant description.
                        Data-centric models tend to capture this information in explicit ways from
                        the start.
                
                
                    MIGRATING DATA
                    Many practitioners and users of existing descriptive material find that even
                        when description is reworked by knowledgeable humans in order to import it
                        to a data-centric metadata representation, the records fail to capture
                        significant information that is embedded in the narrative of these extant
                        descriptions. In many cases, the original cataloger has specialized
                        knowledge of either the collection being described or of the field of study.
                        References to other significant or related work, connections between objects
                        in the collections are often lost in their transformation to data-centric
                        descriptions
                    Tensions between models for capturing descriptive metadata are often
                        amplified at the point at which migration occurs. Automated efforts to
                        migrate encoded extant description have met with mixed success. Chris Prom’s
                        migration of EAD encoded descriptions to Dublin Core RDF records for
                        importation into a cultural heritage OAI database points to some of the
                        problems inherent in automated migration of extant data. Lundberg discusses
                        the implications for information retrieval of data encoded in XML.
                
                
                    THE DIGITAL SCRIPTORIUM: CASE STUDY
                    This paper reports on the outcomes of the effort to automate the migration of
                        data captured in two distinct models and the resulting implications for
                        resource discovery. The paper describes:
                            the differing data models,
                            the process by which the migration occurred,
                            the challenges faced both in migration from relational database to
                                XML and in migration from XML to a relational database model,
                            the development of a relational database model that attempts to
                                capture both the XML encoded manuscript descriptions as well as the
                                data in the existing database
                            the trade-offs in these various representations and
                            the implications for information display and resource
                                discovery.
                        
                    By highlighting points of ambiguity, strengths and weaknesses of the
                        different approaches to metadata capture and challenges in merging the data
                        into the same repository, it is hoped that this study will inform the work
                        of others who face similar challenges in their efforts to provide
                        descriptive metadata to their user communities.
                
            
        
        
            
                REFERENCES
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Ronald
                                    Bourret
                                
                            
                            XML and Databases
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Digital Scriptorum
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Digital Scriptorium Database Schema
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            Encoded Archival Description
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Sigfrid
                                    Lundberg
                                
                            
                            Excursions along the border between metadata for
                                resource discovery and for resource description
                        
                        
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Wendell
                                    Piez
                                
                            
                            Beyond the ‘descriptive vs. procedural’
                                distinction
                        
                        
                            Extreme Markup Languages
                            
                                Montreal, Canada
                                
                                2001
                                197-214
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    Christopher
                                    Prom
                                
                            
                            Does EAD play Well with Other Metadata Standards?:
                                Searching and Retrieving EAD using the OAI Protocols
                        
                        
                            Journal of Archival Organization
                            
                                1
                                3
                                
                                2003
                            
                        
                        (Forthcoming).
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            TEI dictionaries DTD
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                            TEI Medieval Manuscripts Description Work Group (TEI
                                MMSS) draft DTD
                            
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
